Thank you so very much.
I’ll tell you there’s no place like Atlantic City. I mean just think, the history, the boardwalk, salt-water taffy – it’s no wonder that families come back year after year.
And I am so grateful to Marty Rosenberg, a native of Atlantic City being here today to share his story. I’m also grateful to the thousands of workers, who work here to make this city what it is.
Atlantic City is more than a vacation spot. It’s your livelihoods. It’s how you support your families. This city has its share of big names on big buildings. But you and I know it was built by small businesses and the people who work to make it happen here. As a daughter of a small businessman, whose hard work sent me to college, I have a special place in my heart for the contractors, the craftsmen and the shopkeepers who built this city and keep it going.
It is no secret that Atlantic City has gone through some tough times. But the people of A.C. are determined to turn things around. You’ve got a city council and a mayor working hand-in-hand. And if your governor would start doing his job instead of following Donald Trump around holding his coat, maybe we could really get New Jersey’s economy moving again.
Here in Atlantic City and across America, we’ve got to create more good paying jobs with good wages. We’ve got to make the economy work for everyone, everywhere, not just those at the top in some places.
That is just one reason why this election is so important.
And as the people of Atlantic City know better than anyone – Donald Trump cannot do the job for American workers and businesses.
Now let’s just look at this for a minute. Donald Trump says he’s qualified to be President because of his business record. Three weeks ago, he said, and I quote, ‘I’m going to do for the country what I did for my business.’
You know when he says things like that, he’s probably hoping nobody will check up on what he has said. Because what he did for his businesses – and his workers – is nothing to brag about. In fact, it’s shameful. And every single voter in America needs to know about it – so we don’t let him do to our country what he did to his businesses.
That’s why I’m here today.
That is why I’m here today. We’re standing in front of the old Trump Plaza Casino and Hotel. Donald Trump once predicted, ‘It will be the biggest hit yet.’ Now it’s abandoned. You can just make out the word ‘TRUMP’ where it used to be written in flashy lights. He had the letters taken down a few years ago.
But his presence remains. And not far from here is the old Trump Marina Hotel Casino. A few years ago, it was sold at a huge loss.
Just down the boardwalk is the Trump Taj Mahal. Donald once called it the ‘Eighth Wonder of the World.’ It filed for bankruptcy in 2009. Things got so bad, the new management canceled workers’ health insurance and pensions. Now those workers are on strike and we should all support them in getting a fair deal.
Now ask yourself: according to the Donald, isn’t he supposed to be some kind of amazing businessman? So it’s fair to ask since he is applying for a job, what in the world happened here?
Now his excuse for all this failure is that Atlantic City just went downhill — that it’s not his fault.
But don’t believe it. His businesses were failing long before the rest of the town was struggling. In fact, other businesses here did worse because Donald Trump acted so irresponsibly. He calls himself the ‘King of Debt,’ and he earned that title right here in A.C. His bad decisions hurt the whole city.
Here’s what he did.
He intentionally ran up huge amounts of debt on his companies – hundreds of millions of dollars. He borrowed at high interest rates – even after promising regulators that he wouldn’t. What came next? He defaulted on those loans. Didn’t pay them back. And at the end, he bankrupted his companies – not once, not twice, but four times.
Here’s what he said about one of those bankruptcies: ‘I figured,’ he said, ‘it was the bank’s problem, not mine. What the hell did I care?’
I’m guessing many of you have had debt at some point – student loans, mortgages, credit cards. You couldn’t just tell the bank that you just didn’t feel like paying, could you?
And here’s an important thing about how Donald Trump operates. He doesn’t default and go bankrupt as a last resort. He does it over and over again on purpose – even though he knows he will leave others empty-handed while he keeps the plane, the helicopter, the penthouse.
He convinced other people that his Atlantic City properties were a great investment, so they would put in their own hard-earned money. But he always rigged it so he got paid, no matter how his companies performed. When this casino collapsed because of how badly he managed it, hundreds of people lost their jobs; shareholders were wiped out; lenders lost money; contractors – many of them small businesses – took heavy losses. And many themselves went bust.
But Donald Trump? He walked away with millions.
Here’s what he says about the whole experience, he actually brags about it: ‘Atlantic City was a very good cash cow for me for a long time…The money I took out of there was incredible.’
Think about it — the money he took out of here.
That says everything you need to know about Donald Trump. It’s not about what he can build. It’s about how much he can take.
He did it again just this morning. He went on Twitter and said, ‘I made a lot of money in Atlantic City and left.’ Well, he got rich and got out, and he thinks that’s something to be proud of.
He didn’t just take advantage of investors. He took advantage of working people as well.
Donald Trump has been involved in more than 3,500 lawsuits over the past 30 years. That’s one every three days, give or take. And today’s Wednesday, so he’s due for another one.
Now here in Atlantic City, you may know about Vera Coking, the widow whose house on Columbia Place — right over there — Donald tried to seize it through eminent domain and turn into a parking lot for limousines. Thankfully, he lost that fight. But there were thousands more.
And many of those lawsuits were filed by ordinary Americans who worked for Donald Trump and never got paid. Painters, waiters, plumbers – people who needed the money they earned, and didn’t get it – not because Donald Trump couldn’t pay, but because he wouldn’t pay. Hundreds of liens have been filed against him by contractors, going back decades. They all tell the same story: I worked for him, I did my job, he wouldn’t pay me what he owed me. One person after another after another.
We just heard from Marty Rosenberg. His company was called Atlantic Plate Glass. They were hired to do a big job for the Trump Taj Mahal. They worked really hard on it. But at some point, Donald Trump just stopped paying. In the end, he owed Marty’s company nearly half a million dollars for the work they did under the agreement they made. Marty’s business barely survived.
He did the same thing to a kitchen equipment company, a cabinet-maker, a music store owner. He owed $3.9 million to a company that supplied marble for his properties. That business had to shut down, and eventually, the owner had to file for personal bankruptcy: the cost of doing business with Donald Trump. Donald Trump doesn’t think going bankrupt is a big deal – but it’s devastating if you’re someone who plays by the rules.
I thought a lot about my dad in the last weeks as I learn more about Donald Trump’s business behavior.
My dad was a small businessman. If his customers had done to him what Trump did to these companies, he wouldn’t have made it, either.
So this is personal for me. And it’s personal for a lot of people.
It’s not ancient history. If he’s elected President, it’s our future and the future of hardworking people across America.
Because I want you to understand what he did here in Atlantic City is exactly what he will do if he wins in November.
Step one: give a huge tax cut to millionaires like himself. Step two: add trillions to our national debt. Step three: he suggested we could just default on our national debt – like he defaulted on his business debt.
It is the same scam, all over again.
And make no mistake – he’s not asking for forgiveness. He’s just hoping we forget.
The people he’s trying to convince to vote for him now are the same people he’s been exploiting for years: working people, small business people, trying to support their families.
And you know, this seems to be his one move. He makes over-the-top promises, and says if people trust him, put their faith in him – he’ll deliver for them. He’ll make them wildly successful. Then everything falls apart, people get hurt and Donald gets paid.
Remember that, the next time you see him on TV, talking about how America will win big if we elect him President.
Those promises he’s making at his rallies? They’re the same promises he made to his customers at Trump University. Now they’re suing him for fraud.
They’re the same promises he made about another scheme called Trump Institute. The New York Times reports that the lessons it sold for thousands of dollars apiece were plagiarized from somebody else.
They’re the same promises he made to his customers at Trump Condos in Baja California. You should hear these people’s stories. They handed over their savings. Then their calls stopped getting answered. The condos were never built, and they never got their money back.
The Newark Star-Ledger says he – and I quote – ‘excels at ripping people off.’ They wrote, – again I quote – ‘As a result of his narcissistic, destructive risk-taking with other people’s money, his casinos posted huge losses while others thrived.’
And remember, remember what he promised: ‘I’m going to do for the country what I did for my business.’
Well, we should believe him – and make sure he never has the chance to bankrupt America the way he bankrupted his businesses.
So I just want you to take all this information and tell everybody you can. Because people need to make an informed choice. So when Trump says he is for working men and women of America, but Trump Furniture is made in Turkey instead of Lakewood, New Jersey, that matters. Trump Suits were made in Mexico, instead of Ashland, Pennsylvania. Trump Lamps are made in China, not Altoona, Pennsylvania. If he wants to make America great again, maybe he should start by actually making things in America again.
That’s not all. Donald Trump actually stood on a debate stage and said Americans’ wages are too high. He wants to get rid of the federal minimum wage. His campaign said, let’s sell off America’s assets. Where do we start, the Statue of Liberty? These bad ideas just keep coming.
And he wants to wipe out the tough rules we put on big banks after the financial crisis. He’d rig the economy for Wall Street all over again. So we shouldn’t be surprised. Of course he’d be for protecting a system where the rich and powerful stick it to everybody else. He got rich playing by those rules and he wants to keep it that way.
He says he’s a businessman, and this is what businessmen do. Well, as CNN has pointed out, no major company in America has filed Chapter 11 more often in the last 30 years than Trump’s casinos. So no – this is not normal behavior.
Now look, there are great business people in America – men and women who care about their workers and the people they do business with, and want to build something that lasts. They’re decent. They’re honest. Some might even make fine presidents. They would never dream of acting like Donald Trump.
In America, we don’t begrudge people being successful – that’s part of the American dream – but not if they get rich by destroying other people in the process.
So let’s just make sure we don’t put a person like this with his empty promises and his lifetime of selfishness in a position to destroy our lives.
This isn’t about Democrats versus Republicans. This goes far beyond that. Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be President of the United States.
So we can’t let him roll the dice with our children’s futures.
We need to write a new chapter in the American Dream – and it sure cannot be Chapter 11.
So let’s prove that this fall.
We believe in an America that values hard work, treats people with dignity, works to raise your wages, not lower them.
We believe in an America where small businesses are respected, not scammed. I have a plan to make sure big businesses can’t stiff suppliers and contractors like Donald’s been doing for years.
On this beautiful day in this historic city, we believe in an America where people of all religions and races get an equal shot, and our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top.
So let’s carry that message all across America. Let’s fight hard and win in November. And then let’s get to work delivering results for the American people. We are stronger together. Thank you all so much.
Good morning.
Whoa. We are hearing those thunder sticks all across Washington.
The NEA is in town and people should pay attention.
I want to thank your president. Lily, you are a wonderful leader. You are absolutely dedicated, determined and fearless and as the song says, you keep fighting. That is your trademark. And I want to thank you and the officers, every single member of the NEA.
You know, that's something you don't hear often enough, is it? Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you for caring for all of our children, no matter what they look like or where they come from or who they are. And thank you for the insights that you have shared with me, not only through this campaign but going back many years.
I want to say right from the outset that I'm with you.
And I can't be too presumptuous, but if I am fortunate enough to be elected president, educators will have a partner in the White House and you'll always have a seat at the table.
You see, I have this old fashioned idea that when we're making decisions about education, we actually should listen to our educators.
And I can tell you it meant so much to me that you had my back during the primary. I would go to events across our country and I'd see your T-shirts, I'd see your signs. It just made me feel so terrific because we are in this together and we are stronger together and we're going to win together in November.
Today -- today, I am asking for your support in the general election. I'm asking you to campaign with me, campaign for me, campaign for us, for our future because like you, I get up everyday and ask what can we do that will make it better for America's kids?
It is a disgrace that in this country we have children who are hungry, children who are living in the worst kinds of poverty, children who are not being given the same chance to fulfill their own potential that we want for all kids.
I am committed to making sure every child in this country receives a world-class education with good schools and good teachers no matter what ZIP code they live in.
And you know what that means. That means supporting parents to be their child's first teachers, something you all have talked to me about a lot; expanding access to quality -- high-quality childcare and universal pre-school for every child.
It also means repairing our crumbling schools, building new modern schools, investing in the training and support that our educators deserve to have, because when we invest in education, we invest in our country's future and we invest in making a stronger economy that works for all of us, not just those at the top.
And I know to make good on this commitment, we need to focus on reaching new heights, not rehashing old arguments. It is time to stop focusing only on, quote, "failing schools," let's focus on all our great schools too. Let's replicate their success everywhere across America.
And when schools get it right, whether they're traditional public schools or public charter schools, let's figure out what's working.
No, let's figure out what's working and share it with schools across America. We can do that. We've got no time for all these education wars where people on the outside try to foist for-profit schools on our kids. We will never stand for that. That is not acceptable.
So that's what I'm -- that's what I'm asking all of us to do. Let's sit at one table, let's sit and listen to each other. And particularly, let's listen to you, the teachers and the support professionals who are with our kids all day, every day.
And rather than starting from ideology, let's start from what's best for our kids. Now, some of you know, these issues are not new to me. My first job out of law school was working for the Children's Defense Fund. I went door to door in New Bedford, Massachusetts.
I was there to try to figure out why so many kids were not in school. We looked at census data and we looked at school enrollment and there was a big gap. Well, what did we find? We found children with disabilities who desperately wanted to go to school, but they couldn't, either because their local schools were unequipped and unwilling to give them the support they needed or because their families couldn't afford something so basic that would open up the world to them, like a wheelchair or a hearing aid.
So we collected information from across the country and we presented our findings. Those were the days when you actually could present facts to the Congress and they would pay attention to you.
And we got the first legislation, as you know, so well in the entire world, guaranteeing access to education for students with disabilities. I was so proud of that and I'm proud of all of you who have made it real in the lives of the kids like those that I met all those years ago in New Bedford.
And then years later, when my husband was governor of Arkansas, a national expert said -- a national expert said the schools there were among the worst in the country. Well, we didn't like hearing that, did we? So Bill asked me to head up a committee charged with trying to make some differences.
We held hearings in every county and came up with a plan. And boy, did we fight hard to get more resources, as well as higher standards, especially for really small schools. And teachers -- teachers finally got the raises they deserved, the highest increase of any state in the country at that time.
So I carry the lessons that I've learned from experiences like these with me everyday. If people will come together, work together, listen to each other, we can get the resources that our schools and our educators deserve and need to succeed.
My plan to strengthen public education comes down to TLC; teaching, learning and community. Let's start with teaching.
I know what you see everyday, America's asking more of our educators than ever before. You're preparing kids for a competitive economy and staying on top of new technologies and theories and everybody looks to you to fill in the gaps that we as a country have neglected, like giving low-income kids, English language learners, kids with disabilities the support they need to thrive.
And we also ask you to help right wrongs, from poverty and homelessness, to the legacy of racial inequities stretching back centuries. We ask so much you and we don't give you near enough in return.
As president, I'll launch a national campaign to modernize and elevate the profession of teaching. I want all educators at every stage of your careers to you know that they'll be able to keep learning, improving, innovating, and that goes for administrators, too.
And we need to be serious about out raising your pay...
Because teachers make nearly 15 percent less than other college graduates in America. No educator should have to take second and third jobs just to get by.
And the last thing a teacher needs when you're just starting out is a mountain of student debt.
So I want everyone to be able to refinance your student loans so you never have to pay more than you can afford and for people who go into public service, and I include teaching because it is the first and primary public service...
... any remaining debt after you refinance will be forgiven after 10 years.
And we'll go even further for those who teach in hard to fill subjects such as computer science or special education.
And we should also pay support staff better than what they are currently receiving.
I think it is an outrage that so many of the food service staff, the bus drivers, the para-professionals, and education support professionals, who keep our schools running and our children learning, struggle themselves to provide for their own families.
And you know better than most, supporting educators also means finding the right balance on testing. Tests should go back to their original purpose -- giving useful information to teachers and parents...
... so that you know and parents know how our kids in our schools are doing, and then we can come together to help them improve. But when you're forced to teach to a test, our children miss out on some of the most valuable lessons and experiences they can gain in the classroom.
And you know who that hurts the most? That hurts our low-income kids in communities the most. Because when I look at what's being offered in schools from district to district, and I see how extracurricular activities have been stripped out of schools serving low-income kids, but not out of schools that are better funded, that is fundamentally wrong. That is a form of inequality and we are not going to stand for it.
And that's why I believe supporting educators means supporting unions that help create the strongest middle class in the history of the world.
You see, I know you're not just fighting for your members. You're fighting for your students and for families across America.
So here's what I want you to know. For anyone who has faced a hostile state legislature, a union-busting governor or both, help is on the way.
I will fight back against the attacks and I will stand up for your right to organize and bargain collectively.
Now, all these things can only be done in partnership. So I'm asking you and educators across the country to work with me, but I'm also asking you, as I've told Lily many times, advise me and hold me accountable. Keep advocating for your students and your profession.
Now, the second part of TLC is learning, and we need to educate our children for the future, not the past. Technological change is transforming every aspect of our lives and we want our children to be creators, innovators, entrepreneurs, critical thinkers who can collaborate and communicate within their own communities and around the world.
We need our students to be nimble, flexible and brave enough to adopt and build on their skills.
And you know this better than most. The world is changing, but our education system is lagging behind. Consider this; there are more than half a million open jobs that require computing skills across the country and in every major industry, but the majority of schools in the United States do not offer computer science.
It isn't just that there's a shortage of computer science teachers. It's that we haven't made a commitment to do that, but I have. I'm going to prioritize, give our educators the time and the resources they need to learn how to integrate digital tools into the curriculum.
And you know, on top of that, more than 70 percent of teachers assign homework that requires broadband access, but more than five million children don't have it. We need to finish the job and make sure every home in America has access to high-speed, affordable broadband connectivity.
We're going to close the gap so that every child has a chance to know computer science. We're going to close the homework gap, we're going to use all the tools at our disposal including technology to give our kids and our educators what you need in these times that we're living in. And finally, there's the C in TLC, community. So much of what happens inside your classrooms is determined by what happens outside your classrooms, and...
And you see it every day. Too many of our public school students are living in poverty. That's on all of us. You see students coming to school hungry or exhausted from a long night at a shelter.
One night in Iowa during the caucus there, a group of teachers was sitting in the front row of my event and when it came time for questions, one of the teachers said, “What should I do? It's cold outside and I have kids coming to school with no jackets, nothing warm to put on.” She said, “I’m going to go buy them something but that's just the beginning.”
It is time we treated every child as our precious child and not...
Let's -- let's not ignore the weight of the problems that those little kids bring on their little shoulders to school every day. We need to tackle all the problems holding our kids back and we need to do it together as one American community.
Let's create more community schools, more partnerships between schools, social services and nonprofit organizations to provide a range of services and opportunities for kids.
You should not have to be from a well-to-do family to get good mental health services or join a soccer team or be in a play at school.
This should be within reach of all our kids. Now fixing problems like these will take all of us working together from the community level all the way up to the presidency. That's just one of the many reasons why this election is so important because Donald Trump has a very different idea about all of this.
For starters, he wants to, quote, "largely eliminate the department of Education," but he said maybe he'll leave some, quote, "tentacles out there," whatever that means.
Now that agency doesn't always get it right, but it provides support for vital programs from pre-K to Pell Grants and crucial resources that help low income students, students with disabilities and English language learners.
Donald Trump would leave out our most vulnerable students and let them fend for themselves. He's even said that America spends too much on education, and this is coming from someone who wants to give millionaires a $3 trillion tax cut over the next decade.
I'd like to hear him explain that to parents in Detroit where students share classrooms with rodents or in rural South Carolina where the schools are falling to pieces.
If you want to know how Donald Trump approaches education, look at this so-called Trump University.
Hard to believe, but they took advantage of vulnerable Americans, encouraging them to max out their credit cards, empty their retirement savings, destroy their financial futures. No wonder Donald Trump is being sued for fraud.
The bottom line is that just like Trump shouldn't have his finger on the button or his hands on our economy, he should not have anything to do with our children's education and our public schools.
You know, parents and educators across America are already worried about what they are calling and telling me -- they're calling the Trump Effect. Bullying and harassment is on the rise in our schools.
Last week, a mother in Wisconsin wrote me a letter saying that her adopted son had turned to her and said, "If Trump becomes president, he's going to make me go back to Ethiopia." That's the kind of fear Donald Trump is creating in the heart of a 10-year-old American boy.
So I wish more people thought about how Donald Trump's rants are being heard by our children. What...
... their legal bills. You would not tolerate that kind of behavior in your classrooms. Let's not tolerate it from someone trying to become president of the United States.
My friends, we are so much better than this. America is a big- hearted, fair-minded country. We teach our children this is one nation, under God, indivisible with liberty and justice for all.
And that means it -- that means for all, not just those who look a certain way or worship a certain way or love a certain way. That's why we're counting on the American people to make the right choice in November for our future. We are stronger when our children have the chance to live up to their full potential and we are stronger when we invest in public education and our educators.
I feel passionately about this because I'm the product of great public schools and great teachers.
I could keep you here all day telling you stories about what they taught me. In first grade, Ms. Taylor read us "Winnie the Pooh." In fifth grade, Mrs. Crouse taught us about Sputnik and told us we had to work a lot harder on math and science. In sixth grade, Mrs. King drilled us in grammar, and in junior high and high school, my teachers challenged me. They helped me understand the world I lived in and what I might do to make a difference. That's what all of you do every day, spark a students love for learning, change the course of his or her life for the better.
And now, I heard Lily when I was backstage talking about her grand-daughter, Lily Jo, and I'll tell you, as passionate as I have always been, I am even more passionate now with my granddaughter and my grandson. I'm going to make sure not only that they have opportunities, that's not enough, I want to make sure every child has opportunities. I want to make sure our country lives up to our promise to the next generation. I want them to feel they can go as far as their hard work and talent -- and that every other child has the same chance.
So let's keep going. Let's keep making our case. Let's keep working for better schools, more resources, more support for educators. And boy, I can't wait because I know that Lily and everybody will not let me rest. I don't want to rest, Lily; there is too much work to be done.
I will be a president who helps get the support you deserve and need. That's a promise because I believe in public education. I believe in educators. I believe in all of you. Let's give our kids every chance they deserve.
Thank you so much.
Wow, it’s great to be back in Raleigh. Thank you. 
Thank you so much.
You know, I — I have to — I have to confess, I was having such a good time backstage listening to the 120 Minutes Band; listening to Mary Wingate do the national anthem; and just being absolutely transported by Shay Taylor and Friends, the gospel group that got us all just going today.
And I cannot think of a better twosome than the people you just saw up here, because I honestly believe Jim Hunt was not only one of the best governors North Carolina ever had…
…but one of the best governors anywhere in America in the last years.
And what he did to really put North Carolina on a path to the future has stood the test of time. We’ve had a few glitches with others who don’t seem to understand what the ingredients are for building an economy that works for everybody, not just those at the top, but Jim Hunt knows that.
And I look forward to continuing to work with him. And I was so delighted that you had a chance, as I did, to hear Alicia Wilkerson talk about her journey, how hard she has worked, raising her children, getting an education, making it possible for her to have a better future.
And I so greatly appreciate her mentioning the SCHIP program, which has helped eight million kids every year get health insurance.
Now, because we’re in North Carolina and we have a lot of friends here, I want to acknowledge some of them. Your Secretary Of State, Elaine Marshall.
Senator Dan Blue, the minority leader of the North Carolina Senate.
Representative Larry Hall, the Democratic leader of the North Carolina house of representatives.
Linda Coleman, running for lieutenant-governor.
Judge Mike Morgan running against a Republican Supreme Court incumbent. And don’t forget that Dan Blue the III is running for state treasurer. Josh Stein, running for attorney general.
And let’s give a big round of applause to your next governor, Attorney General Roy Cooper. Your next Ag commissioner, Walter Smith, and your next United States senator, Debra Ross.
We’re going to work hard in this election to elect as many Democrats, up and down the ticket, so that North Carolina can get back on the path to the future, get off this detour that you’ve been on.
Now, I — I have to start by saying if you notice anything different about me today, it could be because that now, I’ve got double the grandmother glow.
This past weekend, Chelsea and Marc had a little boy. And we are all totally over the moon about it.
And obviously, our family will do everything we can to make sure that little Charlotte, and now little Aidan grow up with every possible opportunity.
I know that’s what every parent and grandparent, aunt or uncle, godmother, godfather, people who care about the children in our lives, that’s exactly how we all feel. And I believe with all my heart that you should not have to be the grandchild of a former president or secretary of state to have every opportunity available to you in this country.
Every single child deserves the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential.
And that has been the cause of my life. It’s rooted in the values that I learned from my family and my faith.
We are all in this together. And we have a responsibility to lift each other up. As we Methodists like to say, “Do all the good you can to all the people you can, in all the ways you can.” And that is absolutely true for our children.
That’s why I got into public service in the first place. And it’s why I am determined that we will win this election in November.
And I think — I think it’s an understatement to say that Americans face a choice in November.
As I said yesterday in Ohio, Donald Trump offers no real solutions for the economic challenges we face.
He just continues to spout reckless ideas that will run up our debt and cause another economic crash.
I’m here today to offer an alternative. I have a clear vision for the economy and it’s this. We need to make sure our economy works for everyone. Not just those at the top.
Not just for the rich or the well-connected, not just for people living in some parts of the country or people from certain backgrounds and not others, I mean everyone. And I have a plan, I have a plan to get us there.
Five steps we can take together to drive growth that’s strong, fair and lasting. Growth that reduces inequality, increases upward mobility, that reaches into every corner of our country.
The measure of our success will be how much incomes rise for hard working families, how many children are lifted out of poverty. How many Americans can find good jobs that support a middle class life.
And not only that, jobs that provide a sense of dignity and pride. That’s what it means to have an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. That’s the mission. And I’m asking all of you to join me in it.
Now we have to overcome some big challenges, I will admit that. First, too many of our representatives in Washington are in the grips of a failed economic theory called trickle down economics.
Now, I do not doubt their sincerity. But it has been proven wrong again and again. But there still are…
There still are people in Congress who insist on cutting taxes for the wealthy instead of investing in our future. They careen from one self-inflicted crisis to another. Shutting down the government, threatening to default on our national debt, refusing to make the common-sense investments that used to have broad bipartisan support, like rebuilding our roads and our bridges, our tunnels, our highways, our airports.
Or investing in better education from zero through high school and college.
Now, look, I — I like to look at evidence. I plead to that. I think evidence is important when you’re making decisions that affect other people’s lives.
And if the evidence were there to support this ideology, I would have to acknowledge that. But we have seen the results. Twice now in the past 30 years, a Republican president has caused an economic mess and a Democratic president has had to come in and clean it up.
And yes, we know, too many special interests with too many lobbyists have stood in the way of progress while protecting the perks of the privileged few.
And it’s not just Washington. Too many corporations have embraced policies that favor hedge funds and other big shareholders and top management at the expense of their workers, communities and even their long-term value.
They’re driven by Wall Street’s obsession with short-term share prices and quarterly earnings. Now, a recent survey of corporate executives found that more than half, when asked, would hold off making a successful long-term investment, maybe in their workers or plant and equipment or research, if it meant missing a target in the next earnings report.
So corporations stash cash overseas or they send it to top shareholders in the form of stock buybacks or dividends instead of raising wages or investing in research and development. And then this pressure, this short-term pressure, leads to perverse incentives and outrageous behavior.
It is wrong to take taxpayer dollars with one hand and give out pink slips with the other hand.
And no company should be moving their headquarters overseas just to avoid paying their taxes here at home.
And in addition, there have been big changes in how American families live, learn and work. But our policies haven’t kept up. And there are so many examples of this. Over the past several decades, women have entered the workforce and boosted our economy, yet we are the only — the only developed country that doesn’t provide paid family leave of any kind.
We’re asking families to rely on an old system of supports in a new economic reality. And no wonder so many are struggling. The bottom line is that too many leaders in business and government have lost sight of our shared responsibility to each other and to our nation. And…
…they let Wall Street take big risks with unregulated financial activities. They skew our tax code toward the wealthy. They fail to enforce our trade rules. They undermine workers’ rights. They have forgotten that we are all in this together and we are at our best when we recognize that. Excessive inequalities such as we have today reduces economic growth. Markets work best when all the stakeholders share in the benefits.
So the challenges we face are significant. It’s not easy to change Washington or how corporations behave. It takes more than stern words or a flashy slogan. It takes a plan. And it takes experience and the ability to work with both parties to get results.
And that means — that means we need a president who knows what we’re up against; has no illusions about what we need to do to move ahead, but can actually get it done. And that is why I am offering — because there is good news. The good news is everywhere I go, smart, determined men and women are working hard to reverse these trends.
Mayors are pioneering innovative ways to work with the private sector, to invest in their cities. Entrepreneurs and small businesses are building and hiring in places that bigger companies have abandoned. Unions are providing training programs that add value to the companies that employ their members. Union pension funds — union pension funds are already investing in infrastructure projects that have supported more than 100,000 jobs here in our country.
So do not grow weary. Do not grow weary. There are great ideas out there. And we are going to be partners in a big, bold effort to increase economic growth and distribute it more fairly, to build that economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.
I believe the federal government should adopt five ambitious goals. First, let’s break through the dysfunction in Washington…
…to make the biggest investment in new good-paying jobs since World War II.
Second, let’s make college debt-free for all.
And transform the way we prepare Americans for the jobs of the future.
Third, let’s rewrite the rules so more companies share profits with their employers and few ship profits and jobs overseas.
Finally, let’s make sure that Wall Street corporations and the super rich pay their fair share of taxes.
And all of this — all of this depends upon putting our families first, and matching our policies to how we actually live and work in the 21st century.
Now, briefly about these five points. Let’s start with jobs. Every American willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays enough to support a family.
And I know we can do this, because I’ve seen it in the past. You know, I remember when I was growing up, and America had come out of the upheaval of depression and World War, our leaders worked together to invest in a new foundation of American power and prosperity, highways to connect up our entire nation, college and housing for returning veterans and their families, unprecedented scientific research.
And it worked. We built the greatest middle class the world has ever known.
And now — now, we’ve got to get ambitious again. There is nothing we can’t do. Let’s be just as ambitious to build our 21st century American economy to produce the same results for hard-working Americans.
In my first 100 days as president, I will work with both parties to pass a comprehensive plan to create the next generation of good- paying jobs. Now, the heart of my plan will be the biggest investment in American infrastructure in decades, including…
Including establishing an infrastructure bank that will bring private sector dollars off the sidelines and put them to work here.
And I’ve talked — I’ve talked with local leaders around America, and I’ve seen the dire need for investment. In Tampa, for example, I saw how a smart targeted highway investment near a major port can create thousands of good-paying jobs, support the local economy and unlock national commerce.
We can create millions of good-paying jobs while preparing America to compete and win in the economy. So, let’s set these big national goals. And you know, I know how important it is to rebuild our roads, our bridges and our airports. But we’ve got more work to do.
Let’s build better, and let’s connect every household to broadband by the year 2020.
Let’s build a cleaner, more resilient power grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in the country.
Let’s fix failing water systems, like the one that poisoned children in Flint, Michigan.
Let’s renovate our public schools, so every child in every community has access to safe, high-tech classrooms, laboratories and libraries.
Our 100-days jobs package will also include transformational investments in key drivers of growth. Advanced manufacturing, so we can make it in America, and compete and win in the global economy.
Making — making America the clean energy super power of the 21st century, which will create millions of jobs and help protect our planet.
Recommitting to scientific research, which can create new whole industries, just like we did in the ’90s, when we started mapping the human genome. And small businesses, which should be the engine for creating new jobs across America, they need to be free of red tape, they need access to credit.
We need to slash unnecessary regulations, making it’s easier to get start-up capital from community banks and credit unions. If you have an idea for a small business, we want you to get started.
Let’s free entrepreneurs to do what they do best: innovate, grow and hire and make sure that the new service and care giving jobs being created today are jobs that pay well, too.
And that does mean raising the national minimum wage.
So many of these jobs are so personal to us that they need to be respected and lifted up. And I know — I know, too, that we’ve got work to do — to stand with those who are fighting for raising the minimum wage.
It’s not always how we think about this. But I can tell you another engine for growth and job creation would be comprehensive immigration reform. It will bring…
It will bring millions of workers into the formal economy so that you don’t have an un-level playing field, so that workers who are competing for those jobs get undercut because employers go out and find undocumented workers to do those jobs for a lower wage.
And so I really believe it’s not just the right thing to do, but it will be great, it will be smart for our economy. I want people to be able to compete. And I don’t want – I don’t want to have that disadvantage that exists in too many places, where people are being priced out of the jobs they’ve always done.
So we can work toward a full employment and full potential economy and that does mean we can’t ignore those who are still stuck on the sidelines or working part-time when what they really want is a full-time job.
Or those trapped in long-term joblessness, whether they’re veterans, workers with disabilities, people coming home from prison or young people who tried to start their careers in the midst of the great recession.
I particularly want young people to feel that they’re going to get good jobs that will give them that ladder of opportunity that they deserve to have in America.
That’s why I want to expand incentives like the new market’s tax credit, empowerment zones and other ideas that bring business, government and communities together to create good jobs in poor or remote areas. Places that have lost a factory or a mine, where generations of families used to work.
Anyone willing to work should get the help they need to qualify for and find that good job. And that means breaking down the barriers of systemic racism and discrimination…
Those barriers, they hold back African-Americans, Latinos, Asian and Native Americans and women from fully participating in our economy. We need to reverse the long-term neglect that has dried up jobs and opportunity in communities of color, in poor communities.
You know, it’s not by accident that the unemployment rate now among black Americans is twice as high as among whites. Back in the ’90s we were closing that gap. Incomes were going up for everybody.
So I think we have to invest money to create jobs for young people because right now, I’m worried that if young people don’t get that first job when they’re young, learn about work, understand the obligations as well as the promise of work, it will be even more difficult to get them into the work force later on.
And it is way past time for us to guarantee equal pay for women, which is…
So you see…
So you see, it’s — it’s — it is not enough to have an affirmative agenda. We’ve got to knock down these barriers.
And as you have seen here in North Carolina, discriminating against LGBT Americans is bad for business.
So make no mistake, we will defend American jobs and American workers. We’ll say no to bad trade deals and unfair trade practices, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which does not meet my high bar for creating good-paying jobs.
No to assault on the right to organize and bargain collectively. No to every attack on the dignity of working families. We’re going to make this economy work for everybody. And it’s time we started building it from the ground up, from every home and every community, all the way to Washington.
Now, I know very well that if you don’t have the skills for the jobs of tomorrow, it’s going to be difficult. Education is still the pathway for greater opportunities.
Let’s start at the beginning with making quality, affordable childcare and preschool available in every community in the next 10 years, so that we get our littlest Americans off to the best start.
You know, Jim Hunt was a pioneer in this. Why did he care so much about children zero to five, besides that fact that he cared about them? Because he knew there was a direct line to how the youngest children were treated, educated and prepared for school, and what kind of jobs and economic competitiveness North Carolina would have. So we’re going to start by helping families be their child’s first teachers, and we’re going to give them the support they need to do that.
And when it comes to primary and secondary education, I pledge to you we’re going to make sure all kids have good teachers in good schools, no matter what zip code they live in.
You know, for many years, thanks to people and leaders like Jim Hunt, North Carolina was a leading state when it came to education. Now, unfortunately, thanks to your governor and the legislature, the average teacher salary can barely support a family.
It should not be a surprise that thousands have quit in recent years. We should support our teachers, not scapegoat them.
And then let’s make sure every student has options after high school, whether it’s a four-year degree, free community college, an apprenticeship or other forms of higher education.
We need to provide the skills and credentials that match the job openings of today and tomorrow. That’s why I’m proposing new tax credits to encourage more companies to offer paid apprenticeships that lets you earn while you learn.
And I will support the union apprenticeship and training programs already out there. Not every good job in the economy of today and tomorrow requires a four-year college degree.
We need to dignify skills training. So many young people have the talent and the will to succeed. They just need a helping hand. And that’s why I want us to come together to help our young people break free from the burden of student debt.
Now, I’m sure we all have stories. I’ve met so many who tell me they can’t start a business. They can’t even move out of their parents’ basement because of all the student debt holding them back. So let’s set the goal to make debt-free college available for everyone, so future students won’t have to borrow a dime to pay for tuition at a public college or university.
And let’s liberate the millions of Americans who already have student debt by making it easier to refinance, just like a mortgage. Let’s make it easier to have debt forgiven by doing national service. Let’s make it easier to repay what you owe as a portion of your income, so you never have to pay more than you can afford.
I’ve set out a way to do this, and we’ll be talking more about it as we go forward in this campaign. Now, my third goal is to rewrite the rules, so more companies share profits with employees and fewer shift profits and jobs overseas.
Now, I know there are a lot of businesses thriving here at North Carolina and across our country who see employees as assets to invest in, not costs to cut. They’re building companies, not stripping them. They’re creating good jobs, not eliminating them.
But too many — too many businesses take the opposite view. Now, I am not asking corporations to be more charitable, although I think that is important. I’m asking corporations to realize that when more Americans prosper, they prosper, too. Right?
When your paycheck grows, America grows. We are a 70 percent consumption economy. If we want higher growth, we have got to raise incomes, so people have more disposable dollars to be able to spend, instead of holding back out of fear of what will happen.
So, let’s bring a long-term view back to board rooms and executive suites. Let’s restore the link between productivity growth and wage growth.
As president, I will make it a national priority for more companies to share profits with employees, on top of, not instead of good wages.
Let’s recognize the people doing the work, putting in the hours. They’re the ones who should be sharing the rewards. And we should continue to crack down on wage theft and make overtime count, so that companies that pay well can’t be undercut by competitors paying poverty wages.
And I believe we should strengthen unions which have formed the bedrock of a strong middle class.
It should be easier to bargain collectively. That’s not only fair, it makes workers more productive, it strengthens our economy. And let’s close the loopholes that help companies ship jobs and profit overseas. Let’s make companies that outsource jobs to other countries pay back the tax breaks they received while they were here in America.
If corporations try to move their headquarters to a foreign country to skip out on their tax bills, let’s slap a new exit tax on them, and then put that money to work in the communities left behind.
And we should extend the rules passed in Dodd-Frank on Wall Street in crisis, and strengthen them both for the big banks and the shadow banking system. And I will veto any reforms to repeal those rules, and vigorously enforce the law with accountability, so Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again.
Now, fourth, let’s make sure Wall Street corporations and the super rich pay their fair share of taxes. When people say the game is rigged, the best evidence is the tax code. It’s riddled with scams, loopholes and special breaks, like the carried interest loopholes that lets some hedge fund managers pay a lower tax rate than teacher or nurse.
That’s not only unfair, it’s bad economies. And we’re going to stop it. I have been saying that for years.
As president, if Congress won’t ask — act, I will ask the Treasury Department to use its authority to use its authority to close that loophole.
And here’s another idea (inaudible). Let’s pass the so-called Buffet rule, so top executives can’t pay a lower rate than their secretary.
And let’s ask the wealthiest Americans to pay more, including a new tax on multi-millionaires. That’s not only the right thing to do, it’s smart for our economy, because these steps will help pay for the investments we need in jobs and education, without increasing our national debt.
In fact, every program I have proposed in this campaign, I tell you how I will pay for it.
Now, Donald Trump and I disagree on a lot of things and one of them is simple math.
And finally, here’s our fifth goal. Let’s put families first, and make sure our policies match how you actually work and live in the 21st century. Families look a lot different today than they did 30 years ago and so do our jobs. The movement of women into the workforce has produced enormous economic growth over the past few decades.
But with women now the sole or primary breadwinner in a growing number of families, there’s more urgency than ever to make it easier for Americans to be good workers, good parents and good caregivers all at the same time.
The old model of work where you could expect to hold a steady job with good benefits for an entire career is long gone. People in their 20s and 30s have come of age in an economy that’s totally different. And a lot of young parents are discovering just how tough that is on families. Many people now have wildly unpredictable schedules or they cobble together part-time work, or they try to go independent.
Now, flexibility can be good, but you shouldn’t have to worry that your family could lose your health care or retirement savings just because you change jobs or start a small business.
Why do you think every other…
…you know, I have to ask, why do you think every other advanced country has paid family leave? Do you think they’re just unrealistic? Or do you think that they have figured out they can have a stabler economy; they can support families? And that’s what I want us to do. Working families need predictable scheduling, earned sick days and vacation days, quality, affordable childcare and health care.
These are not luxuries. They’re economic necessities. And in today’s economy…
…benefits should be flexible, portable, and comprehensive for everyone. And that means it’s time to expand Social Security as well…
…especially — especially for older women who are widowed or have taken time out of the workforce to care for a loved one, and who are suffering financially because of that. We need to look to a secure retirement for everyone and to provide families relief from crushing costs in health care, housing, prescription drugs.
You know, I looked at the numbers. In some states, two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend up to 35 percent of their income on childcare. For a single parent, it could be 70 percent. So I have set a goal. Families should not have to pay more than 10 percent of your income for childcare.
And I will repeat today what I have said throughout this campaign. I will not raise taxes on the middle class. I will give you tax relief to help ease these burdens.
And you know, whenever I talk about these family issues, Donald Trump says I’m playing the woman card.
Right?
Well, you know what I say, if fighting for childcare, paid leave and equal pay is playing the woman card, then deal me in.
Now look, here’s what I want you to understand. It may be difficult to imagine all this getting done when Washington is so broken. I get that. But I really think progress is possible or I would not be standing up here running to be president of the United States.
I know Republicans and Democrats can work together because I’ve done it. As you heard Alicia say, I helped create the children’s health insurance program when I was First Lady. That happened with support from both parties. And it now covers 8 million kids.
And when you go to get health care for your child, nobody says, “Are you a Republican or a Democrat?” They say, “What does your child need?”
I worked with Republicans many times when I was a Senator from New York and as Secretary of State, so I know we can get results that will make real differences in people’s lives. I know however it’s rare. There’s no question we need to make Washington work much better than it does today, that means in particular, getting unaccountable money out of our politics.
One of the reasons this election is so important is because the Supreme Court hangs in the balance. We need to overturn that terrible Supreme Court decision, Citizens United, and then reform our whole campaign finance system. This is about our democracy but it’s also about our economy. Campaign finance reform and reducing the power of special interests is directly related to getting Washington working for people again, making the right investments, putting your jobs and economic security first.
That’s why I’m passionate about this issue and I will fight hard to end the strangle hold that the wealthy and special interests have on so much of our government. So let’s do this together.
A historic investment in jobs, debt-free college, profit sharing, making those at the top pay their fair share, putting families first in a modern economy and a democracy where working people’s voices are actually heard. That is what we are fighting for in this election.
As I said, as I said during the primary, I am a progressive who likes to get things done and we can do this.
Now, just for a minute, compare what I am proposing to what we hear from Donald Trump. The self-proclaimed “king of debt” has no real ideas for making college more affordable or addressing the student debt crisis. He has no credible plan for rebuilding our infrastructure apart from his wall. He has no real strategy for creating jobs, just a string of empty promises. And maybe we shouldn’t expect better from someone whose most famous words are, “you’re fired!”
Well, here’s what I want you to know, I do have a jobs program. And as President, I’m going to make sure you hear, “you’re hired!”
Here’s the bottom line, economists left, right, and center all agree Donald Trump will drive America back into recession.
Just this week, one of Senator John McCain’s former economic advisers said Trump’s policies would wipe out– wipe out 3.5 million jobs. His tax cuts tilted toward the wealthy would add more than $30 trillion to our national debt over the next 20 years. That is just astonishing.
And it’s no wonder that group called the Economists Intelligence Unit, a leading firm that analyses the top threats to the global economy, now ranks a Trump presidency number three, right behind problems in China, and volatility in the commodities markets. Now look, I know Donald hates it when any points out how hollow his sales pitch really is. And I guess my speech yesterday must have gotten under his skin because right away, he lashed out on Twitter with outlandish lies and conspiracy theories, and he did the same in his speech today.
Now, think about it. He’s going after me personally because he has no answers on the substance.
In fact, he doubled down on being the king of debt.
So all he can do is try to distract us. That’s even why he’s attacking my faith.
And of course, attacking a philanthropic foundation that saves and improves lives around the world.
It’s no surprise he doesn’t understand these things. The Clinton Foundation helps poor people around the world get access to life-saving AIDS medicine.
Donald Trump uses poor people around the world to produce his line of suits and ties.
Here in North Carolina, you know as well as anyone, our economy is already too unpredictable for working families. We can’t let Donald Trump bankrupt America the way he bankrupted his casinos.
We need to write a new chapter in the American dream, and it can’t be Chapter 11.
So, please, join me in this campaign. I’m offering a very different vision about how we’re stronger together when we grow together. We’re stronger when our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top.
I am convinced that if we work hard, if we go into November with the confidence and optimism that should be the American birthright, we will not only win an election, we will chart the course to the future that we want and deserve.
Thank you, and God bless you.
Thank you. 
Thank you all very much.
Thank you. Thank you all.
Thank you. Thank you. I am — I’m absolutely — I’m absolutely delighted to be back in Cleveland and to be here at the Industrial Innovation Center. I’ve had a chance to learn about the great work you do here. I especially want to applaud Team Wendy for everything you do to protect our troops, first responders.
And others from traumatic brain injury. It is so important that we continue to support those who protect us.
Thank you.
Thank you all.
It is good to be back in Cleveland, I can tell you that.
I want to thank — I wan to thank your extraordinary senator, Sherrod Brown, for his leadership, for that very kind and generous introduction. You are very fortunate to — to have him representing you. I want to thank your congresswoman, Marcia Fudge…
Who is both indomitable and indefatigable. She is such a tenacious advocate for the people she represents. I want to acknowledge the mayor, Mayor Jackson, who was here, County Executive Budish. And I particularly want to recognize the passing of George Voinovich, and he devoted his life to serving the people of Ohio as mayor of Cleveland, as governor and senator. And we send our prayers and sympathy to his family.
I also want to thank Dan Moore, the owner and founder of this company and Team Wendy for his belief in Cleveland, for his commitment to create jobs. I can’t wait to work with him to do more of what he has accomplished here.
You know, originally, I had intended to come to Cleveland under very different circumstances. We are heading into a general election that could be the most consequential of our lifetimes. But today is not a day for politics.
On Sunday, Americans woke up to a nightmare that’s become mind numbingly familiar. Another act of terrorism in a place no one expected. A madman filled with hate, with guns in his hands, and just a horrible sense of vengeance and vindictiveness in his heart, apparently consumed by rage against LGBT Americans, and by extension, the openness and diversity that defines our American way of life.
We will learn more about the killer in the days to come. We know that he pledged allegiance to ISIS, that they are now taking credit and that part of their strategy is to radicalize individuals and encourage attacks against the United States, even if they are not coordinated with ISIS leadership. But there’s a lot we still don’t know, including what other mix of motives drove him to kill.
The more we learn about what happened, the better we’ll be able to protect our people going forward. In the days ahead, we will also learn more about the many lives he viciously cut short, many of them young people, just starting out in their lives. They were travel agents and pharmacy techs, college students and amusement park workers, sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, and they had one thing in common. They all had a lot more to give.
We should take a moment today amid our busy lives to think about them, to pray for everyone who was killed, for the wounded, those who are fighting to regain their lives and futures, for our first responders who walked into danger one more time. As a mother, I can’t imagine what those families are going through.
But let’s also remember the other scenes we saw on Sunday. We saw the faces of some of those first responders who rushed into danger and tried to save as many people as they could. We saw survivors like Chris Hansen who risked their lives to help others.
People gathering outside hospitals to comfort anxious family members, waiting for news of their loved ones and waiting, too, to learn more about what they could do to make sure this never happened again.
Religion leaders condemning hate and appealing for peace. People lining up to donate blood. Americans refusing to be intimidated or divided.
Yesterday I called Mayor Dyer of Orlando and offered my support and my appreciation for the leadership that he and the other officials have shown. This is a moment when all Americans need to stand together.
No matter how many times we endure attacks like this, the horror never fades. The murder of innocent people breaks our hearts, tears at our sense of security and makes us furious.
Now we have to steal our resolve to respond. And that’s what I want to talk to you about. How we respond.
The Orlando terrorist may be dead, but the virus that poisoned his mind remains very much alive. And we must attack it with clear eyes, steady hands, unwavering determination and pride in our country and our values.
I have no doubt — I have no doubt we can meet this challenge if we meet it together. Whatever we learn about this killer, his motives in the days ahead, we know already the barbarity that we face from radical jihadists is profound.
In the Middle East, ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities. They are slaughtering Muslims who refuse to accept their medieval ways. They are beheading civilians, including executing LGBT people. They are murdering Americans and Europeans, enslaving, torturing and raping women and girls.
In speeches like this one, after Paris, Brussels and San Bernardino, I have laid out a plan to defeat ISIS and the other radical jihadist groups in the region and beyond.
The attack in Orlando makes it even more clear, we cannot contain this threat. We must defeat it. And the good news is that the coalition effort in Syria and Iraq has made recent gains in the last months.
So we should keep the pressure on ramping up the air campaign, accelerating support for our friends fighting to take and hold ground and pushing our partners in the region to do even more.
We also need continued American leadership to help resolve the political conflicts that fuel ISIS recruitment efforts.
But as ISIS loses actual ground in Iraq and Syria, it will seek to stage more attacks and gain stronger footholds wherever it can, from Afghanistan, to Libya, to Europe.
The threat is metastasizing. We saw this in Paris. And we saw it in Brussels. We face a twisted ideology and poisoned psychology that inspires the so-called lone wolves, radicalized individuals who may or may not have contact and direction from any formal organization.
So, yes, efforts to defeat ISIS on the battlefield must succeed. But it will take more than that.
We have to be just as adaptable and versatile as our enemies. As president, I will make identifying and stopping lone wolves a top priority.
I will put a team together from across our government, the entire government, as well as the private sector and communities to get on top of this urgent challenge. And I will make sure our law enforcement and intelligence professionals have all the resources they need to get the job done.
As we do this, there are three areas that demand attention. First, we and our allies must work hand-in-hand to dismantle the networks that move money, and propaganda, and arms and fighters around the world.
We have to flow — we have to stem the flow of jihadists from Europe and Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and then back again. The only way to do this is by working closely with our partners, strengthening our alliances, not weakening them or walking away from them.
Second, here at home, we must harden our own defenses. We have to do more to support our first responders, law enforcement and intelligence officers who do incredible work every day at great personal risk to keep our country safe.
I have seen firsthand how hard their job is, and how well they do it.
In Orlando, at least one police officer was shot in the head. Thankfully, his life was saved by a Kevlar helmet, something folks here at Team Wendy know a lot about.
It has often been said that our law enforcement, our intelligence agencies, our first responders have to be right 100 percent of the time, but terrorists only have to be right once.
What a heavy responsibility. These men and women deserve both our respect and gratitude. And they deserve the right tools, and resources and training. Too often, state and local officials can’t get access to intelligence from the federal government that would help them do their jobs.
We need to change that. We also need to work…
We also need to work with local law enforcement and business owners on ways to protect vulnerable, so-called soft targets, like nightclubs and shopping malls and hotels and movie theaters and schools and houses of worship.
Now, I know a lot of Americans are asking how it was possible that someone already on the FBI’s radar could have still been able to commit an attack like the one in Orlando, and what more we can do to stop this kind of thing from happening again.
Well, we have to see what the investigation uncovers. If there are things that can and should be done to improve our ability to prevent, we must do them. We already know we need more resources for this fight. The professionals who keep us safe would be the first to say we need better intelligence to discover and disrupt terrorist plots before they can be carried out.
That’s why I have proposed an intelligence surge to bolster our capabilities across the board with appropriate safeguards here at home.
Even as we make sure our security officials get the tools they need to prevent attacks, it’s essential that we stop terrorists from getting the tools they need to carry out the attack.
And that is especially true when it comes to assault weapons like those used in Orlando and San Bernardino.
I believe weapons of war have no place on our streets and we may have our disagreements about gun safety regulations, but we should all be able to agree on a few essential things.
If the FBI is watching you for a suspected terrorist link, you shouldn’t be able to just go buy a gun with no questions asked.
And you shouldn’t be able to exploit loopholes and evade criminal background checks by buying online or at a gun show.
And yes, if you’re too dangerous to get on a plane, you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America.
Now, I know some will say that assault weapons and background checks are totally separate issues having nothing to do with terrorism. Well, in Orlando and San Bernardino terrorists used assault weapons, the AR-15. And they used it to kill Americans. That was the same assault weapon used to kill those little children in Sandy Hook.
We have to make it harder for people who should not have those weapons of war. And that may not stop every shooting or every terrorist attack, but it will stop some and it will save lives and it will protect our first responders.
And I want you to know, I’m not going to stop fighting for these kinds of provisions.
Now, the third area that demands attention is preventing radicalization and countering efforts by ISIS and other international terrorist networks to recruit in the United States and Europe.
For starters, it is long past time for the Saudis, the Qataris and the Kuwaitis and others to stop their citizens from funding extremist organizations. And they should stop supporting radical schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path towards extremism.
We also have to use all our capabilities to counter jihadist propaganda online. This is something that I spend a lot of time on at the State Department.
As president, I will work with our great tech companies from Silicon Valley to Boston to step up our game. We have to a better job intercepting ISIS’ communications, tracking and analyzing social media posts and mapping jihadist networks, as well as promoting credible voices who can provide alternatives to radicalization.
And there is more to do offline as well.
Since 9/11, law enforcement agencies have worked hard to build relationships with Muslim American communities. Millions of peace-loving Muslims live, work and raise their families across America. And they are the most likely to recognize the insidious effects of radicalization before it’s too late, and the best positioned to help us block it. So we should be intensifying contacts in those communities, not scapegoating or isolating them.
Last year, I visited a pilot program in Minneapolis that helps parents, teachers, imams, mental health professionals and others recognize signs of radicalization in young people and work with law enforcement to intervene before it’s too late.
I’ve also met with local leaders pursuing innovative approaches in Los Angeles and other places. And we need more efforts like that in more cities across America. And as the director of the FBI has pointed out, we should avoid eroding trust in that community, which will only make law enforcement’s job more difficult.
Inflammatory anti-Muslim rhetoric and threatening to ban the families and friends of Muslim Americans as well as millions of Muslim business people and tourists from entering our country hurts the vast majority of Muslims who love freedom and hate terror.
So does saying that we have to start special surveillance on our fellow Americans because of their religion. It’s no coincidence that hate crimes against American Muslims and mosques have tripled after Paris and San Bernardino. That’s wrong. And it’s also dangerous. It plays right into the terrorists’ hands.
Still, as I have said before, none of us can close our eyes to the fact that we do face enemies who use their distorted version of Islam to justify slaughtering $ innocent people. They’d take us all back to the Stone Age if they could, just as they have in parts of Iraq and Syria.
The terrorist in Orlando targeted LGBT Americans out of hatred and bigotry. And an attack on any American is an attack on all Americans.
And I want to say this to all the LGBT people grieving today in Florida and across our country. You have millions of allies who will always have your back.
And I am one of them.
From Stonewall to Laramie, and now Orlando, we’ve seen too many examples of how the struggle to live freely, openly and without fear has been met by violence. We have to stand together, be proud together. There is no better rebuke to the terrorists and all those who hate.
Our open, diverse society is an asset in the struggle against terrorism, not a liability. It makes us stronger and more resistant to radicalization. And this raises a larger point about the future of our country.
America is strongest when we all believe that we have a stake in our country and our future.
This vision has sustained us from the beginning. The belief that, yes, we are all created equal and the journey we have made to turn that into reality over the course of our history, that we are not a land of winners and losers, that we should all have the opportunity to live up to our God-given potential. And we have a responsibility to help others do so as well.
As I look at American history, I see that this has always been a country of “we” not “me.” We stand together because we are stronger together. E pluribus unum. One — out of many, one — has seen us through the darkest chapters of our history. Ever since 13 squabbling colonies put aside their disagreements and united because they realized they were going to rise together or fall separately, generation after generation has fought and marched and organized to widen the circle of dignity and opportunity. Ending slavery. Securing and expanding the right to vote. Throwing open the doors of education. Building the greatest middle class the world has ever seen.
And we are stronger when more people can participate in our democracy.
And we are stronger when everyone can share in the rewards of our economy and contribute to our communities, when we bridge our divides and lift each other up instead of tearing each other down. Now we have overcome a lot together and we will overcome the threats of terror and radicalization and all of our other challenges. Here in Ohio and across America, I’ve listened to people talk about the problems that keep you up at night.
The bonds that hold us together as communities, as one national community, are strained by an economy with too much inequality and too little upward mobility. By social and political divisions that have diminished our trust in each other and our confidence in our shared future. I have heard that, and I want you to know as your president I will work every day to break down all the barriers holding you back and keeping us apart. We’re gonna get an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top, we’re gonna forge a new sense of connection and shared responsibility to each other and our nation.
And finally, finally let me remind us all, I remember, I remember how it felt, on the day after 9/11, and I bet many of you do as well. Americans from all walks of life rallied together with a sense of common purpose on September the 12th and in the days and weeks and months that followed. We had each others’ backs. I was a senator from New York. There was a Republican president, a Republican governor, and a Republican mayor. We did not attack each other. We worked with each other to protect our country and to rebuild our city.
President Bush went to a Muslim community center just six days after the attacks to send a message of unity and solidarity. To anyone who wanted to take out their anger on our Muslim neighbors and fellow citizens, he said, “That should not, and that will not, stand in America.” It is time to get back to the spirit of those days, spirit of 9/12. Let’s make sure we keep looking to the best of our country, to the best within each of us. Democratic and Republican presidents have risen to the occasion in the face of tragedy. That is what we are called to do, my friends, and I am so confident and optimistic that is exactly what we will do.
Thank you all so much.