Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Wow. Look at that. I love you. I love you North Carolina, I love you. Unbelievable.
You know, it's an incredible thing. The system is rigged but we're still happy to be together. Right? Totally rigged. What a system. What a group, I'll tell you what.
What's going on -- I'm gonna be talking about it but before I do -- a great friend of mine, somebody respected by everybody, Senator Bob Corker.
Great guy. Great guy. Great person.
So I have to tell you a few things. Numbers just came out, just now, number one we're doing very well in the polls, that's important, OK? Very well. We're doing very, very well. But you know the numbers just came out that during the primary system, during the primaries, the Republicans -- I wonder why -- were up 62 percent, the Democrats were down 21 percent. These are final numbers. Just came out.
That tells you a little bit, a little bit about what's going on. And what's going on very big, and big league, is what you witnessed today and over the last week.
From Bill Clinton going to the plane, just happened to be there, just happened to be there, I wonder how long he waited? But for Bill Clinton to go to the plane and then to have what happened today where essentially, I thought, everybody thought, based on what was being said she was guilty. She was guilty. And it turned out that -- we're not going to press charges. It's really amazing.
But I'll tell you -- look, we have a rigged system, folks. I used to say it during the primaries. We're all together. I won North Carolina big league because of you. Big league. And not only did the Republican Party go way up from what it was four years ago, way, way up -- but Donald Trump, in the history of the primary system, Republican Party, with 17 people running -- a lot of people don't understand you say 17 people -- I got almost 14 million votes, more than anybody in the history of the Republican Party. More than Ronald Reagan. More than the Bushes. More than Richard Nixon. More than Dwight D. Eisenhower -- who did win the Second World War, he's certainly up there -- we got the highest vote count in the history of the Republican Party.
That was such a big thing for me. We won 37 states -- I just got stronger and stronger and stronger. And I think we're stronger now than ever before. We're fighting a very dishonest media.
Do we have a protester? Get him out please.
We love our protesters, don't we? It's the only time I get the cameras to turn. The only time we get those cameras to turn -- look at the size of this place. This is really great. This is really great.
Get him out. Get him out. Get him out. All right, thank you.
Thank you. That's all right, take it easy. Take it easy folks.
You know, if I could speak to these people for a little while -- what do we want, when you think of it? We want good education, we want a strong military, we want strong borders, we do want the wall, we want to keep our jobs in North Carolina...
We want to keep our jobs in North Carolina. I mean look at what's going on folks. We're gonna build the wall, don't worry. Who's gonna pay for the wall? Who's gonna pay?
I didn't hear you. Who's gonna pay?
Better believe it. They're gonna pay. They'll be happy to pay if the right person asks them. They're gonna be happy to pay. No problem. If the wrong person like crooked Hillary Clinton asks them they're not gonna pay but she's never gonna ask. She's never gonna ask and I'll tell you why.
When it comes to trade, and I just got a list of companies that have left North Carolina and they've gone down to Mexico, and it's a disgrace. It is a disgrace what's happening and we're gonna stop it. And it's not gonna happen any longer. We're losing our jobs, we're losing our manufacturing, we're gonna stop the nonsense that's going on and it's so easy to stop, we will stop it so fast your heads will spin. Remember that. Your heads will spin.
So we'll talk a little bit about trade later. It's so easy. The trade is so easy folks. It's so easy. The trade of all of them. We're gonna knock the hell out of ISIS. We have...
...by the way...
... we have a president who's out campaigning for Crooked Hillary Clinton and he should be home working on ISIS where the threat is getting worse and worse. He should be working on trade. He should be working on the borders. People are flowing into our country from lots of places. But from Syria, no more. No more. OK, they're not coming here. No more. We don't know who they are, we don't know where they come from, they have no documentation, they have no paperwork and who knows? Who knows?
But you know what? We can't take any more chances folks. We can't take any more chances. If you look at Crooked Hillary, she wants to increase the immigrants coming in from Syria. Again, they could be ISIS. This could be the all-time great Trojan Horse. You know the story of the Trojan Horse. This could be the all-time great -- look at what one person has done in Orlando. Just take a look.
One person. Look at the horror that that person has wreaked on our country. The gay community, the LGTB community was just -- nobody can even fathom what took place. That's one bad apple. We have many people coming in, and you know what? It just takes a small percentage, but there's something going on and guess what? We have a leader that doesn't even want to discuss the name of the problem. And the name of the problem is radical Islamic terrorism. And it's a problem.
And we've got Hillary Clinton, who's weak, who's ineffective, she'll never be able to do the job. Her judgment is horrible. Look at her judgment on e-mails. Who would do it? Look at her judgment. Her judgment is horrible. All right? Her judgment is horrible.
Now who said that about Hillary? Bernie Sanders said, "Her judgment is bad. She's got bad judgment." OK? Now let me tell you. Whether it's ISIS, whether it's trade, whether it's borders, whether it's jobs -- it's gonna be four more years of the same thing. The last thing we need is another Clinton or the last thing we need is an Obama-Clinton in the White House.
We have got a mess in this country. We owe $19 trillion, soon to be $21 trillion, the debt has doubled under Obama. It's doubled. Wait till you see. We are sitting on a mess and it's gotta be taken care of. Way it gets taken care of -- at least that aspect of it -- is jobs. We're gonna bring jobs back to North Carolina. We're gonna bring jobs back to our country.
It's going to be America first. Not all these other countries that don't give a damn about us. It's going to be America first. America, America, America first.
We have a person in the White House that's having a lot of fun. Lot of fun. I watched him today. Like a carnival act. Lot of fun. Moving around, he has the whole thing -- you know, great, great, great. I'm saying, "This is a president." We need a president who's gonna bring us back. We need a president that's not gonna be divisive. We need a president that's gonna take care of the African-American community. Remember that. Remember that.
Obama is all talk and no action. We need a president that's going to create jobs for Hispanics who don't have the jobs. We need a president that's gonna turn our country around and Obama cannot do it, and Hillary Clinton will be even worse, believe me. She will be even worse.
I brought up something last night. I heard they're flying down on Air Force One. Now Air Force One is a very old Boeing 747. It sucks up a lot of gas. A lot of fuel. Boy, the fuel bill. You turn on those engines, I can tell you, it's a lot of money. I said, let me ask you a question. Why is she campaigning with the plane of the United States? Why is she campaigning and why is he allowed to come down, get on that very, very, very expensive plane -- you know he talks about the carbon footprint. OK?
He wants to solve the carbon footprint but he gets on an old, the Boeing 747 that's spewing stuff into the air. He gets her on the plane and then they say, "We will fight for the environment. We will fight for the carbon footprint." Then he gets back into the Boeing 747 and goes back to Washington.
His greatest was when he wanted to play golf in Hawaii, so he takes the 747 -- by the way he's played more rounds just about than people that play professionally on the PGA Tour. I mean, this guy.
And he gets on this plane, flies to Hawaii, he's there for a long time, golf, golf, golf, more, more, learning how to chip, learning how to hit the drive, learning how to putt. I want more.
Our country is going to Hell. ISIS is laughing at us, they're chopping off heads, they're drowning people in steel cages, and he's out there playing golf with just about as long a trip as you can make from Washington.
Then, after a long extended vacation, he gets back on the plane, flies back, lands, starts talking about the environment. OK, give me a break folks. Give me a break. Give me a break.
Now, you know, we need unity in the Republican Party. I have to be honest, I think I'll win without the unity but we need unity in the Republican Party. For the most part we have unity. We have some pretty good stuff and we have some great people like Bob who just came up and so many others, so many senators, so many congressmen and -women. We have great people.
But we need real unity and the leaders have to get supported, and if they don't get supported -- we're going to win anyway; don't worry about it. In fact, I probably do better without the kind of support that we're talking about because that's why I'm here in the first place.
The convention is going to be terrific. We have great speakers. We have fantastic speakers. We have so many people that want to speak. You know, they give us, "Oh, they don't have enough." But we have so many people who want to speak.
I have made so many enemies by saying, "I can't let you do it." But we want people that love our country and that want to be there and that love our party. And if they don't love our party, they shouldn't be there.
Let me just tell you one little thing, which turns out to be a big, big thing. Defense is always most important. Right? We have to defend our country. But we're gonna have to build up our military again. It's really depleted. It's in bad shape. We're gonna build it up. We're gonna take care of our vets like you wouldn't believe because our vets are being mistreated horribly, horribly. Our greatest people.
And we have a plan that's received universal fantastic reviews. And I'm the only one -- you know, I made a speech. Up in a great part of the world, OK? I won't even mention where. But I made a speech and during the speech I said, "Let's raise some money for the vets." We ended up raising $5.6 million for vets. For vets.
I gave a million, and we ended up -- I could have just made a speech and left. And the press comes down, "Well, he should have given it here, he should have given it faster," we have to vet the vets, you know that, right? They're groups -- who knows -- we have to check them out.
But anyway we raised $5.6 million for the vets. I am so proud of it. I love the vets. I have received more accolades from the groups we're sending, groups that have never had money. A hundred thousand, two hundred thousand, in one case $1.1 million, in another case $250,000, $75,000, $50,000. All of these groups. I don't know, 30 something groups.
It was so beautiful to see. I, you, all of us, we have received accolades. And I say all of us because this is a movement, folks. This is not like a normal situation. Look at this room. Look at the size of this room. And there are thousands of people -- and I got wiped out getting off the plane. It was raining and windy and I want to tell you -- this is actually beautiful, and now you know it's my hair because any hair that could withstand that wind -- the pilot -- it is my hair -- the pilot said wait about 10 to 20 minutes before you get out of the plane. I said why, he said 35, 45 mile per hour gusts, raining. I said no, we're not gonna keep these people waiting. We're gonna come out, we're gonna get out, we're gonna talk, we're gonna make America great again.
And I'll tell you, I'm so proud of what's taken place. We really did that and so many other things, because it is a movement. It's a movement like nobody's ever seen before. I mean they actually say -- I watched Bill O'Reilly, said it's the single greatest -- good man. I'm on tonight but you guys are here so you're not going to see it but watch it later.
I'm on tonight. I did a phone-in. It's always good when they take you by phone. That means you're hot. You know you can do it by phone. When you start getting, "I'm sorry. I won't be able to do it, I'm on a plane. I'm going to North Carolina." How about by phone? They don't do phones. Right? Did you ever see somebody call in to Bill O'Reilly? I never saw it.
We do phone-ins to Meet the Press. We do phone-ins to Face the Nation. This week -- it's so much easier, folks, you sit home. Hi, how you doing? How's everything going? How's the world, how's the world. But it is a movement that we have going on. People have never seen anything like it. Pundits, that hate me -- of which there are many, we've made them look pretty bad -- don't forget. Don't forget this. Most of them said, "He's not gonna run." Then they said, "If he runs, well he won't do it. But he's gonna have fun. He's gonna leave in July." I mean, I only announced on June 16th. Give me a little credit.
"He's gonna have fun, he's gonna get some kicks, he's going to build his brand," what I need more. More people to know who I am, right?
And meantime I got killed. I lost the shirts because Macy's was so disloyal. I lost the ties because Macy's didn't like what I was saying about illegal immigration. OK, can you believe it? It's not like it's the most profitable thing I've ever done doing this. I don't care, it doesn't matter to me. It's nice when you don't have to care. But I don't care.
What I care about is making America great again. That's much more important. Much more important.
But I've lost -- if you think about it -- The Apprentice -- I mean not small stuff, it's big show, they came to me, they said we want to renew two more seasons. We want to renew you and we'll pay you anything. It's a lot of money in that stuff when you have a head (ph) job. Fourteen seasons of "The Apprentice." I said today to the head person at Comcast -- he's a great guy -- Steve Burke -- no you're not, you've got to do The Apprentice. I said no, I'm gonna run for president.
You can't do both. You're not allowed. Equal time. It's called equal time laws. I said, "Steve, I'm gonna run for president. At least I'm pretty sure." Because that was three months before. Because I want to tell you. It takes guts to do what we're all doing, but it takes guts to do what I'm doing, believe me. It takes guts. It's not easy.
You get hit by dishonesty -- and not all reporters are bad, some are terrific. Some are honest and honorable and good and professional, but a lot of them are terrible. You get hit from 15 different directions on stuff that's very unfair to begin with. You get hit in so many different ways. And it started off with 17 people and then it gets down to one.
They made the right choice. Am I doing a good job, by the way? Am I doing a good job? Because I'm a messenger.
Essentially, I'm your messenger. The message is simple. We're gonna take our country back. We're gonna have everybody included folks. We want to include everybody. We want to help African-American youth. We want to help African-Americans. We want to help Hispanics, Latinos. We want to help everybody. We've got to help everybody. We've got to bring our country together. We've got to bring our country together. So important.
When you look at what's going on and then you look at what's going on with ISIS where they're blowing up airplanes, where they're doing things that are just inconceivable, that hasn't happened since medieval times. We studied history. And we loved history. I loved history. Chopping off heads -- that medieval times. Today it's like a common occurrence.
And these are animals. These are animals that have to be stopped. And I was against the war in Iraq. Now I was a civilian. I'm a businessman. It was a long time ago but I was against it. I was always against it. I didn't want to go to war in Iraq. I said I think you're going to destabilize the Middle East. I think you're going to have a lot of problems. Who would have known this is going to happen and on top of everything else what else did we get out? Other than a totally destabilization, a total mess? Thousands and thousands of our lives and other lives -- their lives.
Thousands and thousands and thousands of our young people's lives. Destroyed. Tens of thousands of wounded. Where they're wounded so gravely -- they're the bravest people I've ever seen. They have a better attitude in life than I do. Some of these people, they have the best attitude I've ever seen. I work with them. We help them. And they have the best attitude I've ever seen. I've never seen anything like it. I'm serious. They have a better attitude about life in some cases than I do. These are amazing, amazing people.
We shouldn't have done it. But what did we get out of it? We got ISIS on top of everything else. Now, we have a president that doesn't know what the hell he's doing. He doesn't have a clue, folks. And instead of staying there with a fairly small force, he announces to the world he's gonna take everybody out. And they'll be out by a certain date. And the only thing that was a little surprising was the enemy didn't believe him, because they said, "Nobody could be that stupid, to announce that we're gonna be out on a certain date."
And then that date came and we were gone. We were gone. We shouldn't have been there. We shouldn't have destabilized -- Saddam Hussein was a bad guy. Right? He was a bad guy. Really bad guy. But you know what, he did well. He killed terrorists. He did that so good they didn't read him the rights. They didn't talk. There were terrorists who (ph) it's over. Today, Iraq is Harvard for terrorism. You want to be a terrorist? You go to Iraq. It's like Harvard. OK? So sad.
So sad, OK? So sad. And we're going to take care of it, folks. We have no choice. We have no choice. It was when they cut off the heads, initially, we were all amazed. I think they overplayed their hand. And if they didn't, then we are all fools. Because we cannot let them get away with what they're doing right now terrorizing the world.
We're going to be so strong, we're gonna be so tough, we're gonna be so vicious, and we're gonna knock them for a loop. We have no choice.
So I just want to -- I wrote some notes coming in the plane because I was watching this tragedy that took place today and over the last few days. It's a tragedy. Because we're a country of law. We're a country of order. Other people have been so badly hurt by doing things so much less than crooked Hillary Clinton. So much less. Right? SO much less.
I mean, you look at so many people have suffered so gravely for doing so much less. Now does that mean that we expunge their record? Does that mean that we say, "All of you people that have been so guilty for so many years we can no longer accept that as a ruling." Because what we've done for her, and she was so much worse than anybody that we're talking about, does that mean that we have to exonerate everybody? Just take back the punishment that we gave them? Because we have a country that's supposed to be fair.
When you hear what was said by the FBI director today and you listen to what he said and in he middle of it he was talking about so many different things. He talked about extremely careless. She was extremely careless. That's a tremendous word. You didn't have to be careless. You didn't even have to really know that what you were doing and you're guilty. Because we're talking about serious stuff. We're talking about the lifeblood of our country. We're talking about the safety of our people. The laws are very explicit. Stupidity is not a reason that you're going to be innocent, OK? It's not a reason.
And I don't happen to believe that it was stupidity, OK? But even stupidity is not a reason and boy, what they've done.
So I wrote this out, and I'm gonna read some of it to you. And I think it makes sense and I think it's important for us to understand.
Today is the best evidence ever that we've seen that our system is absolutely, totally rigged. It's rigged.
And I use that term initially when I was running in the Republican primaries and I was the first to use it. Then all of a sudden it became a hot term. Everybody was using the word, "rigged, rigged." But if you remember, I'd win Louisiana and I'd find out I'd be getting enough delegates, what happens? And places like Colorado which were so good to me, but all of a sudden we find out that they don't have the vote. And other things. OK. I used the word great. And frankly I'll be honest. If I didn't win in a landslide I wouldn't be standing up here. You'd be watching some politician who would lose to Hillary Clinton. Believe me. Believe me.
I started winning -- I learned about rigged very fast. I learned. But I used the term "rigged." Then all of a sudden Bernie Sanders started using it and other people and now everyone talks about "rigged" but I'm gonna keep using it because I was the one that brought it up and I'm the one -- I asked a couple of political pros, "Did you ever hear the word rigged, it's a rigged everything?" And they really -- it hasn't been a thing used, I guess it has to be somewhere along the line, but it hasn't.
But think of Bernie Sanders. Who's the most angry about this? I think the one with the most to lose is Bernie Sanders. Because honestly, he was waiting for the FBI primary. And guess what? He just lost today. The FBI primary. He lost the FBI primary. Bernie, my poor Bernie. Aw, Bernie, I feel so badly for Bernie. But you know what? A lot of Bernie Sanders' supporters are gonna be voting for Trump. Because Bernie Sanders was right. Bernie Sanders was right about a couple of things.
He's right about the system being rigged. But he's also right about trade. Our trade deals are a disaster. They're killing our jobs. They're killing our families. They're killing our incomes. I mean people in this room, many people in this room, and I'm going to fight for you because there's gonna be change fast. Many people in this room are making less money today than they made 18 years ago, effectively. And they're working two jobs instead of one, and this horrible, stupid Obamacare is a killer which is giving them part-time employment when they never had part-time employment in their lives.
And the premiums are through the roof and the deductibles are so high that you'll never be able to use it unless you die a very vicious, long, slow death. OK? And it's going to explode in '17 anyway and we're gonna replace it before it explodes, and we're gonna replace it with something that's great and that's less expensive both for yourselves and for the country. It's a horror show. You have to see what I'm hearing.
In Texas, going through Obamacare, Blue Cross Blue Shield raised 60 percent. A 60 percent increase in premiums, Blue Cross Blue Shield. Through Obamacare.
Now, I hear that on November 1st, they're going to have an increase on Obamacare and health care that is going to set this country in motion. And I mean motion in a bad way. November 1st. So what Obama wants to do, because it's actually election-defying, it's election-changing. The numbers are bigger than Texas, 60 percent. The numbers are astronomical. And what they want to do is they now want to take those numbers and move them from November 1st to anytime after the election. And we're not letting them get away with it folks. We're not gonna let them get away with it.
As I said, today is the best evidence we've ever seen that our system is totally rigged. Hillary Clinton put the entire country in danger, she put the entire country in danger. And Benghazi. And Benghazi and plenty of other things by the way. It was confirmed today that she routinely sent classified e-mails on an insecure private server that could be easily hacked by hostile foreign agents. And we leaned that people she e-mailed were hacked and probably I think maybe definitely, were hacked by these hostile actors.
And these are bad but very, very smart people. A helluva lot smarter than what we have in Washington, that I can tell you.
Our enemies may have a blackmail file on crooked Hillary, and this alone means that she should not be allowed to serve as president of the United States.
We now know -- just wrote this out -- we now know that she lied to the country when she said she did not send classified information on her server. She lied. She sent vast amounts of classified information including information classified as top secret. Top secret. OK?
And this is where they said that she was extremely careless, and frankly I say grossly incompetent. She would be such a lousy president, folks. So sad. The lives of the American people were put at risk by Hillary Clinton so that she could carry on her corrupt financial dealings probably -- that's probably why she didn't want people to see what the hell she was doing.
She went to extraordinary lengths to carry out an Enron-style purge of her e-mails. Thirty-three thousand e-mails are missing. And they say, "Oh she's fine, she's fine." Thirty-three thousand. And I've always been told you can't really get rid of an e-mail. Have you ever heard this? That if we have the real super-geniuses that know this stuff, they say you can't get rid of e-mails. But we didn't use them. Because they didn't want to use them. They didn't want to use them.
So like a criminal with a guilty conscience, Clinton had her lawyers delete, destroy and wipe away forever -- except I still say there are geniuses that can find them -- 30,000 -- think of this -- 30,000 e-mails. This again disqualifies her from service and -- just think of it. How can you have this?
We know now that these deletions included e-mails that were work-related. One more big, fat beautiful lie by crooked Hillary. Any government employee who engaged in this kind of behavior would be barred from handling classified information. Again, that alone disqualifies her and again, Bernie Sanders talked about bad, bad judgment, but he's not happy tonight folks, because now it looks like it's over for Bernie but you know what? I have a feeling they're gonna have a lot of people marching on Philadelphia. Let's see what happens. OK?
I don't know about you but I always felt that Hillary Clinton would escape criminal charges for her dangerous and illegal behavior because I always knew, and I always see, and it's so sad, that our system is in fact rigged. It's totally rigged. OK? It's corrupt, it's rigged, it's disgraceful, you have a statement made today at 11:00 o'clock then you have a big speech by the president flying in on Air Force One with Hillary Clinton a few hours later, even though we have more people here than they do -- but we won't say that.
So the A.G. met with the President -- had to -- before the announcement. I mean, how about that? Met with President Bill Clinton -- how about that deal? He's waiting around, he's waiting at the airport -- oh look, the A.G.'s coming, let me go say hello. Thirty-nine minutes -- I'm gonna talk about the grandkids. He's got two. I hear they're beautiful. I hear they're beautiful. He's got two. Now I have eight grandchildren and I will tell you. I can talk about them. And after I say, "Isn't he beautiful, isn't she beautiful, oh I love this guy." I love the kid, I love you. But after about a minute I can't go much longer. I want to get to business, right? For you, I want to get to business.
But he didn't talk about it. He talked about golf. He talked about the grandkids and I would say that would take anywhere from 30 seconds to a minute. Seriously. Am I right? I mean, how long can you talk? "Miss Attorney General, I have the most beautiful grandchildren you've ever seen. Let me show you a picture. Isn't that great? Let me show you another picture. What do you think? I think they're beautiful. Aren't they beautiful? And they're smart. And they're great. They're great."
Now he's starting to run out of words. That's 30 seconds. Now he's gonna talk about golf. I know more about golf than he does. You can't talk about golf that long. It just -- "Hey, Jack Nicklaus is the greatest, the greatest, right? He is. Tiger. When's Tiger coming back? Adam Scott's wonderful. He won at Dural. We love Adam Scott. Phil Mickelson we love."
What are you going to go? You can't talk about it much longer. Couple of minutes, OK. I don't think they went over the swing, the technique or anything, right? The plane's too small. You think? Right?
So give the grandchildren two minutes, give the golf three and a half minutes, that's a long time to be sitting there twiddling your thumbs, "What else are we gonna talk about? Let's talk about Hillary."
Let's talk about Hillary. Did you see today Hillary announced that she may consider the Attorney General -- I'm not casting aspersions on anybody. Other than Hillary of course. But she may consider the Attorney General, who's ruling on her case now, now they're ruling on her case -- to continue forward as Attorney General.
Now, how do you make that statement when they are going to rule? Because remember what happened/ The FBI makes their recommendation and then still it's up to the Attorney General's office. So Hillary said today, at least according to what I saw on television, in which you can't always believe -- I found it hard to believe she'd say this -- but she said today that we may consider the Attorney General to go forward. That's like a bribe, isn't it? Isn't it sort of a bribe?
I think it's a bribe. I mean that if she wins she's gonna consider extending the Attorney General and you know what? I'm not saying, I'm not knocking the Attorney General, what I'm saying is, "How can you say that?" It's a bribe.
I mean the Attorney General is sitting there saying, "If I get Hillary off the hook I'm gonna have four more years or eight more years, but if she loses I'm out of a job." It's a bribe. It's a disgrace. It's a disgrace. She is laughing at the stupidity of our system. She is laughing and so is her husband Bill, laughing at what's going on. And they've been there before. You know it. They've been there between Whitewater and all of the others, they've been there. Look at her cattle futures. I mean she did better with cattle proportionately than people that have been in the cattle business all their lives and have made millions in the cattle -- she did better than they did and she never did it before. I wonder how that happened. She's crooked Hillary folks.
And now with all of that going on you have Obama campaigning. He was campaigning and this was set up a long time ago, and he knew that the FBI was going to do this because it would have been very uncomfortable for him to campaign with her actually if they didn't take a pass on crooked Hillary. So they take a pass, they announce that they're not gonna press charges, lo and behold a few hours later -let's have a press conference, let's do a speech together.
By the way her speech -- her speech was terrible. I watched it. How boring was that speech. Do we like Trump better? Do we like Trump better?
Now let me just tell you because the word temperament comes in. He's got a very strong temperament. I get to tell you the truth. Chopping off heads. Losing thousands and thousands and thousands of people to these savage animals, right? We need somebody with a tough temperament, it's time.
And I'll tell you whether it's on trade, whether it's on military, whether it's on that the border -- the last person these other countries want to see as President of the United States, because I'm gonna be fighting for you, not for them. I'm gonna be fighting for you -- is Donald J. Trump. The last person.
The last person. So a very amazing and prestigious man -- I won't use his name but some people will know who I'm talking about -- I was in his house. And he said, "Donald, I thought you were totally wrong. I thought you were much too tough on China. I thought you were much to tough on Japan. I thought you were much too tough on Mexico, and all of these other countries that you're talking to with respect but I thought you were much too tough. And for a year I've been telling people, he's being too tough. I thought you were much too tough Donald on Saudi Arabia. Much too tough. I thought you were much too tough on Japan," -- because as you know, and as you never knew before I got involved, we pay for a big portion of Japan's military. And I want them to help us out. This isn't 40 years ago, this isn't 30 years ago, they're sending cars to us by the millions and believe me we don't need more Iran deals done by incompetent people.
We need smart people, we need good negotiators, and believe me I'll head it up and I know what I'm doing. But we have the greatest negotiators in the world and we don't use them. We use political hacks. So we take care of Japan. And we take care of Germany. And we take care of lots of places. South Korea. We have 28,000 soldiers on the line between North and South Korea. Order a television. See if you can buy one in the United States. You know what the answer is? You can't. Order other things. Many other things. See if you can buy them -- hey, who just moved to Mexico, right? Who just moved to Mexico from Indiana, the great state of Indiana that gave me another great victory. Carrier. So we don't make that any more.
So Carrier's moving by the way. I would tell the people at Carrier, "Love you people. Every time you make an air conditioning unit and enjoy your beautiful factory you're gonna send it through that border which is now a very strong, and secure border, and you're gonna pay 35 percent tax." And you know what? They're not leaving. They're not leaving folks. They're not gonna leave.
Now Hillary Clinton won't say that. And I'll tell you, the press doesn't treat it right. One person actually at the New York Times, David Sanger, treated it right. Along with (inaudible). They wrote a story that was pretty accurate. About 82 percent. But I mention this all the time. The press will go, "Donald Trump wants Japan to go nuclear." I didn't say that. You have to be prepared always in a deal to walk.
For instance, with the horrible deal we made with Iran. The horrible deal. The incompetent deal. Kerry should have picked up and walked out a couple of times. He should have walked when they said they won't give back our hostages until the deal is over. He should have walked. And then he should have walked, doubled up the sanctions, and by the time they landed back in the United States they could have turned the plane around, you would have had those hostages back instead of waiting for years.
And he should have said one other thing, folks. We gave them back $150 billion. I would have said it differently. I would have said that -- you know my father used to say, "Son you're too tough. Take the lumps out. Soft, nice and easy." My father was great. Good salesman. Good builder. He loved to build houses. He was a good builder. I learned so much from him. And he was a great guy, a lovely guy. I loved my father. But he used to say, "Son, son. You're too tough. Take the lumps out."
In the old days I would have said, "We're not giving you the $150 billion." And they would have been angry and we would have had lots of problems, right? I wouldn't say it that way anymore. My father taught me too well. I would have said, "Fellas." And it is all fellas, I hate to say. They haven't figured out that the women are smarter than the men, OK?
They will. They will. It will take about 150 to 200 more years but they're gonna figure it out. Then we're really in trouble. Can you imagine?
Because the Persians are great negotiators and they totally out-negotiated. So I would have said, "Fellas. We have a problem. We have a bad budget that was just passed. The omnibus budget. Disaster. We're going up to $21 trillion in debt. We don't have the money. I'm sorry. I apologize. I won't be able to pull it off, I'm not gonna be able to give you the $150 billion back, I can't do it. I want to do it. I want to do it so badly. And you're right, you should get it. You should get it all, you're right, but we don't have the money, I'm sorry."
And they'll go crazy. And then we'll leave and we say the hell with them, double up the sanctions again and they'll say, "We'll drop the $150 billion." We have rank amateurs dealing for us. I have the greatest businessmen in the world, Carl Icahn many (ph) endorsing me. We're going to bring so much back. We have right now -- I say it's $5 trillion, the government says $2.5 trillion, but it's a lot. In other places, in other areas across the seas. That we want to bring back. My tax plan which cuts taxes for everybody, by the way, including business and middle class in particular...
... it cuts taxes. We're gonna bring all that money back and that money's gonna be spent in the United States. Right now they can't get the money back so you have corporate inversions. You have companies leaving the United States to get their money. They can't get their money back. It's impossible bureaucratically and the taxes are so ridiculous that only a person that's really, really dumb would say send it back. So they leave the money over there and they take the company and they move the company to the money. Ever hear that one before? And it's happening all over the place. Take a look at what's going on.
And it's going to end. We're one of the highest taxed nations in the world. We're cutting the hell out of taxes, we're cutting the hell out of these ridiculous regulations which are destroying our businesses, destroying our businesses.
And we are gonna do it. So just to finish, because I'm so proud of what I wrote, I have to read it. Right? I love it. I actually love writing. People don't realize -- do you know how many number one bestsellers I've had? And "The Art of the Deal" I absolutely know how to write. I love reading this stuff. I love it.
The question that really has to be asked is this -- what is Hillary Clinton's motive. And to that, I'm even gonna say, "Who cares?" She's put us in danger. And some people say that it's corrupt financially. I don't care what her motive is. All I know is she had a motive but she's erased so many e-mails we'll never find out. OK? Bill and Hillary Clinton raked in millions of dollars from foreign governments, special interests and international corporations in exchange for favors, folks. For favors. She's crooked Hillary, don't you understand that?
This is one of the most crooked politicians in history. These entities either funneled money into the Clinton Foundation or paid Bill Clinton lavishly for speeches. Got paid a fortune. At least 60 companies that lobbied the State Department during Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State donated a total of $26 million to the Clinton Foundation. OK? Twenty-six million, and she's dealing with these countries.
Bill Clinton -- and by the way, many of these countries treat women and want to enslave women and they treat women horribly and as far as the gay community? They push them off buildings and they kill them and they execute them. And she has tens of millions of dollars from these countries. Believe me, I am better for the gay community. I am better for women than she will ever be on her best day. On her best day.
Bill Clinton was paid a fortune to deliver a speech in Moscow, Russia while Hillary Clinton was in charge of the Russian reset. Another disaster. Bill Clinton was paid money by the Chinese government -- a lot -- and its supporters while Hillary handled China policy, and during this time China was stealing hundreds of billions of dollars in United States intellectual property. OK folks? We could go forever. ABC News said President Clinton accepted speaking fees from numerous companies and individuals with interests pending before Hillary Clinton's State Department.
Oh that's nice. That's nice. International Business Times said, "Governments and corporations involved in the arms deals are approved by Clinton's State Department have delivered her State Department," -- she's approving deals -- "have delivered between $54 million and $140 million to the Clinton Foundation." One hundred and forty million dollars. What's going on here? To the Clinton Foundation as well as hundreds of thousands of dollars in payments to the Clinton family.
Then, when Hillary left the State Department she was paid $21.6 million for speeches delivered in less than two years. That's not bad. Twenty-one million dollars for making speeches. And she's a boring speaker. She's terrible. Think what I could make. Oh man what I could make. She's a terrible speaker. She got $21.6 million for speeches. And she refuses, because Bernie Sanders knows this better than anybody, she refuses to give up the text of the speeches. I don't know what's in there.
And hey, I don't care if she gives it up. Because I understand her. And I understand many of the people that are her supporters. And by the way, many of them are friends of mine. And they're gonna own her, folks. They're gonna own her. Don't forget I used to be on the other side of the equation. I used to be establishment. Then on June 16th I ran and everyone said, "Oh, he's no longer establishment." He's not supposed to be running. He doesn't need our money."
That's terrible. And I put up $55 million approximately in the primaries and won, big league, and then...
... and I'm putting up money now but I'm raising a lot of money for the Party and it's good, it's good, it's really good. We're gonna win this thing. We're gonna take this country back from these thieves and these crooks and these horrible presidents, these phony presidents and I mean it when I say when Obama can take all of this time off, when you have bombings all over the place and you have ISIS as an example and all of the bad deals, when he can take that kind of time off to spend it with Hillary Clinton with the seal of the president in front as she stands there, she doesn't look presidential to me folks. I can tell you that. She doesn't look presidential to me.
Hillary also had reason to hide her foreign policy disasters and the decisions that went into them. Her push for regime change in Libya, Egypt and Syria has been a total and complete disaster. Her Iraq policy has been catastrophic. She's unleashed ISIS across the Middle East with her bad decisions and her bad judgment. And she's gonna do nothing about it because she's a weak, weak person. She doesn't have the strength and she doesn't have the temperament, believe me.
There's gonna be more of the same folks, more of the same. In 2009, before she took office, Libya was cooperating, Syria was under control, Iraq was seeing a reduction in violence and Iran was being choked, absolutely choked, financially. They were dying. Now after she left, ISIS controls huge portions of Iraq. Syria and Libya committing unspeakable inhuman atrocities and trying to launch attacks against the West. Iran meanwhile has been placed on the path to nuclear weapons, has become a true power. They've become a true power in the Middle East and beyond.
When they weren't a power we gave them power with that horrible, horrible deal. So Hillary Clinton's policies have spread ISIS and made Iran the dominant Islamic power in the Middle East. Hillary Clinton can't keep her e-mail safe and you know what folks? She sure as hell can't keep our country safe. Can't do it.
So I want to thank the people of North Carolina. It's been such an amazing run. Such an amazing run.
We've had a lot of good times. We've had a lot of fun. We've had a lot of good speeches, we've had a lot of good times together, seriously, and look -- not Obama change. Remember Obama used to go, "We need change." It sounded so good. Everybody thought, and I actually thought he'd be a cheerleader for the country. I thought he'd be a cheerleader and he's really turned out to be a very divisive person. OK? We need change.
I hate to use the term but we really do need change. We need fresh, tough, bold ideas. We need people that know what they're doing. We need people that aren't worried about political correctness. We can't use that term. We can't use that term.
And I watched Obama a week ago spend a whole speech on talking about why he shouldn't necessarily have to say "radical Islam." Why he shouldn't do it. That's what the problem is and he doesn't even know it. I don't even think he knows honestly folks. I don't think he has a clue. I don't think he knows what the hell is going on. I don't think he knows what's going on.
And you know, it's a very interesting thing, but I was watching yesterday and everybody is saying "ISIS, ISIS. ISIS. ISIS." You can have your definition. It has to do with territory and it has to do with other things and we can both give you definitions of ISIS and ISIL. But did you ever notice? People say ISIS except him. He says ISIL. ISIL. Because an ISIL is being driven back. And an ISIL is a JV, remember that? The JV. Man. If that's the JV I sure as hell don't want to see the varsity, right? Don't worry. Don't worry. If I win they'll be the JV and then they'll go down to first grade pretty soon folks.
But he says ISIL and you know it's almost like he does it to make people upset. I've had so many people say why doesn't he just say ISIS? Forgetting about definitions. And actually some friends of mine that are very, very good on this subject say ISIS is actually more accurate. But who knows? But everybody says ISIS. Say ISIS. You'll be so nice. Right?
"And ISIL will be driven back." It's always ISIL will be driven back and in the meantime it's a disaster. It's totally a disaster. Remember this and I've said it before, our military is depleted at a time when probably in the history of this country we need strong military. We are going to win North Carolina.
We are going to get rid of these fools, these fools, that are running our country. They're fools. We are not going to go four more years that even the FBI today talks so horribly about. This person. To a point where you say how can you possibly say no charges? What they said, and what he said today was so bad. So here's what we're gonna do. We're gonna start winning again. We're gonna win so much you're going to be so sick of winning folks. You're gonna be so angry at me. You're gonna be so angry at me. You're gonna have your Lieutenant Governors here. You're going to have your head of the Supreme Court who's here. These are great people with great, great -- where are they? Are they around here someplace? They're here. Stand up. Come on, stand up. Beautiful.
These are great, great people. With great reputations. I will tell you outside of North Carolina they have great reputations, OK? And you're lucky to have them.
But here's what we're gonna do. We're gonna start winning again. We're gonna win at every level. We're gonna take care of our vets and we're really gonna take care of our vets and it's not even a question of money, it's a question of competence. We're spending so much money and it's corrupt. It's a corrupt enterprise. The Veterans Administration -- you look at what's going on in Arizona at the V.A. It's a corrupt enterprise. So we're going to start winning.
We're going to win on the Second Amendment. We're not gonna let people take our guns away.
We're gonna terminate Common Core out of Washington, we're gonna bring our education local. Local. So we can have our local people who love our children and who really understand our children give them the kind of education that we want. We're gonna repeal and replace Obamacare so quickly, so quickly. We're gonna create strong, strong borders, we're gonna build our wall, we're gonna stop drugs from flowing into our country like water. It's flowing into our country like water. We're gonna protect our states, we're gonna protect our youth and others from the drugs that are flowing through the Southern border.
We are going to make the greatest trade deals anyone's ever made. We're going to bring our jobs back. We're going to bring manufacturing back. We're going to be selling things to other countries. We're not going to let countries come in and take advantage of us, take our companies out, sell their goods with no tax with no nothing and then when our manufacturers want to go to China and other places to sell their goods they can't get in -- their goods into the country. Because the Chinese say, "We don't want your goods."
So they dump onto our land and they dump their steel and they dump their aluminum and they destroy our factories and they destroy so much and you know what folks? We're gonna end up doing our own products largely again. And you know what, let me tell you. Our products -- and I am not for isolation. This is only if they don't behave. But they devalue their currency. They make it impossible for our companies to compete. Every time we start to do well various countries that are grand masters, they start devaluing their currencies and countries go from boy I'm feeling good today to oh, here we go again. You can't compete. It's cheating. It's a big form of cheating.
We are going to take care of our manufacturers and we are going to start making product again and let me tell you something. We may pay a little more for the product, but we will have all those jobs that make the product in the long run. We're going to be much better off.
Thank you, everybody. Thank you so much. I greatly appreciate it.
And Id like to thank the owner of the plant, Gabe and Gloria. Youre here someplace. Thank you.
I want to thank Rick Santorum, our senator, great senator for being here and for the endorsement. We really appreciate it. And I have to say, all of the amazing workers. Gabe said they are the most important. The amazing workers. And I know you have been through some very, very tough times, but were going to make it better and were going to make it better fast, OK? Just watch.
So today Im going to talk about how to make America wealthy again. We have to do it. With 30-miles from Steel City, Pittsburgh played a central role in building our nation. The legacy of Pennsylvania steelworkers lives in the bridges, railways and skyscrapers that make up our a great American landscape.
But our workers loyalty was repaid, you know it better than anybody, with total betrayal. Our politicians have aggressively pursued a policy of globalization, moving our jobs, our wealth and our factories to Mexico and overseas. Globalization has made the financial elite, who donate to politicians, very, very wealthy. I used to be one of them.
I hate to say it , but I used to be one. But it has left millions of our workers with nothing but poverty and heartache. When subsidized foreign steel is dumped into our markets, threatening our factories, the politicians have proven, folks, have proven they do nothing.
For years, they watched on the sidelines as our jobs vanished and our communities were plunged into Depression-level unemployment. Many of these areas have never recovered and never will unless I become president.
Then, theyre going to recover fast. Our politicians took away from the people their means of making a living and supporting their families. Skilled craftsmen and tradespeople and factory workers have seen the jobs they love shipped thousands and thousands of miles away.
Many Pennsylvania towns, once thriving and humming, are now in a state of total disrepair. This wave of globalization has wiped out totally, totally, our middle class. It does not have to be this way. We can turn it around and we can turn it around fast.
But if we are going to deliver real change, were going to have to reject the campaign of fear and intimidation being pursued by powerful corporations, media leaks and political dynasties. The people who rigged the system for their benefit will do anything and say anything to keep things exactly the way they are.
The people who rigged the system are supporting Hillary Clinton because they know as long as she is in charge, nothing is going to change. The inner cities will remain poor. The factories will remain closed. The borders will remain open. The special interests will remain firmly in control. Hillary Clinton and her friends in global finance want to scare America into thinking small.
And they want to scare the American people out of voting for the better future. And you have a great future, folks. You gave a great future. These people have given her tens of millions of dollars. My campaign has the absolute opposite message. I want you to imagine a much better life and a life where you can believe in the American dream again. Right now, you cant do that.
I want you to imagine how much better our future can be if we declare independence from the elites who led us from one financial and foreign policy disaster to another. Our friends in Britain recently voted to take back control of their economy, politics and borders.
I was on the right side of that issue, as you know, with the people. I was there. I said it was going to happen, I felt it. While Hillary, as always, stood with the elites and both she and President Obama predicted that one, and many others, totally wrong.
Now, its time for the American people to take back their future. Going to take it back.
Thats the choice that we face. We can either give into Hillary Clintons campaign of fear or we can choose to believe again in America.
Very sadly, we lost our way when we stopped believing in our country. America became the worlds dominant economy by becoming the worlds dominant producer. You know that from right here, right in this plant.
The wealth this created was shared broadly, creating the biggest middle-class the world has ever known. But then, America changed its policy from promoting development in America  in, in, in America  to promoting development in other nations. Thats whats happening and thats whats happened.
We allowed foreign countries to subsidize their goods, devalue their currencies, violate their agreements and cheat in every way imaginable, and our politicians did nothing about it. Trillions of our dollars and millions of our jobs flowed overseas as a result. I have visited cities and towns across this country where one-third or even half of manufacturing jobs have been wiped out in the last 20 years. Today, we import nearly $800 billion more in goods than we export. We cant continue to do that. This is not some natural disaster, its a political and politician-made disaster. Very simple. And it can be corrected and we can correct it fast when we have people with the right thinking. Right up here. It is the consequence It is the consequence of a leadership class that worships globalism over Americanism. This is a direct affront to our founding fathers, who  America wanted to be strong. They wanted this country to be strong. They wanted to be independent and they wanted it to be free.
Our founding fathers understood trade much better than our current politicians, believe me.
George Washington said that the promotion of domestic manufacturing will be among the first consequences to flow from an energetic government. Alexander Hamilton spoke frequently of the expediency of encouraging manufacturing in, in, in the United States.
And listen to this. The first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln, warned that, quote, the abandonment of the protective policy by the American government will produce want and ruin among our people. He understood it much better than our current politicians, thats why he was Abraham Lincoln, I guess.
Our original Constitution did not even have an income tax. Instead, it had tariffs emphasizing taxation of foreign, not domestic, production.
Yet today, 240 years after the Revolution, weve turned things completely upside down. We tax and regulate and restrict our companies to death and then we allow foreign countries that cheat to export their goods to us tax-free. How stupid is this? How could it happen? How stupid is this?
As a result, we have become more dependent on foreign countries than ever before. Ladies and gentlemen, it is time to declare our economic independence once again. That means
That means voting for Donald Trump.
Ill do it. No doubt about it. Not even a little doubt. It also means reversing two of the worst legacies of the Clinton years. America has lost nearly 1/3 of its manufacturing jobs since 1997. Even as the country has increased its population, think of this, by 50 million people. At the center of this catastrophe are two trade deals pushed by Bill and Hillary Clinton.
First, the North American Free Trade Agreement, or the disaster called NAFTA. Second, Chinas entry into the World Trade Organization. NAFTA was the worst trade deal in the history  its like  the history of this country. And Chinas entrance into the World Trade Organization has enabled the greatest job theft in the history of our country.
It was Bill Clinton who signed NAFTA. People dont remember. In 1993. And Hillary Clinton who supported it. And the havoc that it wreaked after he left office was unbelievable. It was also Bill Clinton who lobbied for Chinas disastrous entry into the World Trade Organization, and Hillary Clinton who backed that terrible, terrible agreement.
Then as secretary of state, Hillary Clinton stood by idly while China cheated on its currency, added another trillion dollars to the trade deficit, and stole hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property.
And I have been talking about China for many years. And you know what? Nobody listened. But they are listening now. That, I can tell you.
The city of Pittsburgh and the state of Pennsylvania have lost 1/3 of their manufacturing jobs since the Clintons put China into the WTO. 50,000 factories across America have shut their doors in that time. And this factory, because of your great owners, Gabe and Gloria, its hanging in. Hanging in. But they just told me, it is not easy.
Almost half of our entire manufacturing trade deficit in goods with the world is the result and its the result of trade with China. It was also Hillary Clinton, the secretary of state, who shoved us into a job-killing deal with South Korea, as reported by the Economic Policy Institute in May . This deal doubled our trade deficit with South Korea and destroyed nearly 100,000 American jobs.
As Bernie Sanders said, Hillary Clinton voted for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions, millions of jobs.
Trade reform and the negotiation of great trade deals is the quickest way to bring our jobs back to our country.
To understand why trade reform creates jobs, and it creates a lot of them, we need to understand how all nations grow and prosper. Massive trade deficits subtract directly from our gross domestic product. From 1947 to 2001, a span of over five decades, our inflation-adjusted Gross Domestic Product grew at a rate of 3.5 percent. However, since 2002, the year after we fully opened our markets to Chinese imports, the GDP growth rate has been cut in half.
But is this mean for Americans? Not good. For every 1 percent of GDP growth, we failed to generate in any given year, we failed to create over one million jobs.
What a waste, and what a sad, sad thing.
Americans job creation deficit, due to slower growth since 2002, is well over 20 million jobs. And that is just about the number of jobs our country needs right now to put America back to work at decent wages. Wages are very low, because there is no competition. And they are going to go up, because were going to thrive again as a country.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership is the greatest danger yet. The TPP, as it is known, would be the death blow for American manufacturing. It would give up all of our economic leverage to an international commission that would put the interests of foreign countries above our own. It would further open our markets to aggressive currency cheaters  cheaters, thats what they are, cheaters.
They are not playing by the rules. They are cheating. It would make it easier for our trading competitors to ship cheap subsidized goods into United States markets, while allowing foreign countries to continue putting up barriers in front of our exports  which is what they do. It is very hard to export to their countries. They make it very difficult.
We, on the other hand  come on in, everybody. Come on in. Bad leadership.
The TPP would lower tariffs would lower tariffs on foreign cars, while leaving in place the foreign practices that keep American cars from being sold overseas.
That is not all, mark my words. China will enter the TPP through the back door at a later date. They are watching, they are studying. They are not in it now, but are going to be in it. If it is good, they will be there.
By the way, if it is no good, theyll pass. Its the same way, always is.
The agreement would also force American workers to compete directly against workers from Vietnam, one of the lowest wage countries on Earth. Not only will the TPP undermine our economy, but it will undermine our independence.
Thats what is happening. The TPP creates a new international commission that makes decisions the American people are no longer given the right to veto. These commissions are great for Hillarys Wall Street funders, who can spend vast amounts of money to influence the people on the commissions and the outcomes.
It should be no surprise, then, that Hillary Clinton, according to Bloomberg, took a leading part in drafting the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Please remember that, especially in November.
She praised or pushed the TPP on 45 separate occasions, and even called it the gold standard. Hillary Clinton was totally for the TPP just a short while ago.
But when she saw my stance  which is totally against  she was shamed into saying she would be against it, too. And I will tell you, it was the same shame that she had recently where she was sort of forced into saying radical Islamic terrorism, which she didnt want to say, but she was shamed into that.
But have no doubt that she will immediately approve it, if it is put before her. And that is guaranteed. Guaranteed.
She will do this, just as she has betrayed American workers for Wall Street and throughout  throughout her career. Her whole career she has betrayed the American worker. She is trying to put on a good front now, she will betray you again.
Her career and her husband have signed so many disasters and never, ever forget NAFTA. Just never ever forget it, because you know what its done and I know what its done. And in touring, Ive seen the devastation that its left behind.
Heres how it would go. She would make a small token change, declare the TPP Pact fixed and ram it through and you will suffer. That is why Hillary is now only saying she has problems with TPP in its current form.
You know what that means. That means like they will make a little two-word change and she will fix it and she will feel great. But she says in its current form, she can rush to embrace it again and she will at the earliest opportunity. If the media doesnt believe me, I have a challenge for you and Hillary. Ask Hillary if she is willing to withdraw from the TPP her first day in office and unconditionally rule out its passage in any form.
Theres no way to fix TPP. We need bilateral trade deals. We do not need to enter into another massive international agreement that ties us up and binds us down, like TPP does.
A Trump administration will change our failed trade policies, and I mean quickly.
Thank you. Here are seven steps I would pursue right away to bring back our jobs. Number one, I am going to withdraw the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which has not yet been ratified.
I am going to appoint the toughest and smartest, and I know them all, trade negotiators to fight on behalf of American workers.
I am going to direct the secretary of commerce to identify every violation of trade agreements a foreign country is currently using to harm you, the American worker.
I will then direct all appropriate agencies to use every tool under American and international law to end these abuses. And abuse is the right word.
Number four. Im going to tell our NAFTA partners that I intend to immediately renegotiate the terms of that agreement to get a better deal by a lot. Not just a little, by a lot for our workers.
And if they dont agree to a renegotiation, which they might not because they are so used to having their own way  not with Trump they wont have their own way.
Then, I will submit under Article 2205 of the NAFTA Agreement that America intends to withdraw from the deal.
Number five. Im going to instruct my treasury secretary to label China a currency manipulator, which should have been done years ago.
Any country that devalues their currency in order to take unfair advantage of the United States, which is many countries, will be met with sharply. And that includes tariffs and taxes.
Number six, Im going to instruct the U.S. trade representative to bring trade cases against China, both in this country and at the WTO.
Chinas unfair subsidy behavior is prohibited by the terms of its entrance to the WTO and I intend to enforce those rules and regulations. And basically, I intend to enforce the agreements from all countries, including China.
Seven, if China does not stop its illegal activities, including its theft of American trade secrets, I will use every lawful  this is very easy. This is so easy. I love saying this. I will use every lawful presidential power to remedy trade disputes, including the application of tariffs consistent with Section 201 and 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
And when they say trade expansion, theyre talking about other countries, theyre not talking about us because there is no expansion. They get the expansion, we get the joblessness. Thats the way it works. Its not going to happen anymore.
President Reagan deployed similar trade measures when motorcycle and semiconductor imports threatened U.S. industry. I remember. His tariff on Japanese motorcycles was 45 percent and his tariff to shield Americas semiconductor industry was 100 percent, and that had a big impact, folks. A big impact.
Hillary Clinton and her campaign of fear will try to spread the lie that these actions will start a trade war. You already have a trade war, and were losing badly. Badly.
She has it completely backwards. Hillary Clinton unleashed a trade war against the American worker when she supported one terrible deal after another, from NAFTA, to China to South Korea. It doesnt matter. No matter where she went, the American worker was hurt and youll be hurt worse than ever before if she becomes president of the United States. That, I can tell you.
A Trump administration will end that war by getting a fair deal for the American people and the American worker. The era of economic surrender will finally be over. It will be over. Youre not going to see it anymore. Well, I cant guarantee it, because after me, theyll probably start doing it again. But we will have four and maybe eight great, great productive years and well never go back and well make sure we never go back.
Thank you. Thank you, very much. Thank you. Thank you very much, everyone. I appreciate it.
A new era of prosperity will finally begin. America will be independent once more. Independent once more. Doesnt that sound great?
Under a Trump presidency, the American worker will finally have a president who will protect them and fight for them.
We will stand up to trade cheating. Cheating. Cheaters, thats what they are. Cheaters. We will stand up to trade cheating anywhere and everywhere it threatens the American job.
We will make America the best place in the world to start a business. Well hire workers and well open factories and well get rid of these horrible regulations that make it impossible to do business in this country.
This will also include massive tax reform to lift the crushing burdens on American workers and businesses. We will also get rid of all of these rules and all of these problems and all of the bureaucracy which are destroying, absolutely destroying our job creation capacity, which we used to be the best in the world and now were getting close to the bottom, folks. Were getting close to the bottom.
Many people think that these regulations are an even greater impediment than the fact that were one of the highest-taxed nations in the world. Were also going to fully capture Americas tremendous energy capacity. This will create for our workers, and thats what we want, for our workers, growth for our economy, and begin reducing our budget deficits which are massive; yearly budget deficits, massive.
Our trade deficits, we dont even want to talk about it. Our budget deficits are massive.
Hillary Clinton wants to shut down energy production and shut down the mines  and she wants to shut down and she said it just recently  she wants to shut down the miners. I want to do exactly the opposite.
A Trump administration will also ensure that we start using American steel for American infrastructure. And aluminum.
Just like the American steel from Pennsylvania that built the Empire State Building, thats what were going to do. It built the Empire State Building. It will be American steel that will fortify Americas crumbling bridges  American steel. It will be American steel.
It will be American steel that sends our skyscrapers soaring, soaring into the sky, beautiful sight, more beautiful with American steel. It will be American steel that rebuilds our inner cities. It will be American hand (ph) that remake this country, and it will American energy mined from American resources, that powers this country.
It will be American workers who are hired to do the job. Nobody else  American workers.
We are going to put American steel and aluminum back into the backbone of our country.
This alone will create massive numbers of jobs, high-paying jobs, good jobs, not the jobs we have today, which everybody agrees are bad jobs. Were going to create massive numbers of good jobs.
On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy, we are going to put America first again.
We are going to make America wealthy again.
We are going to reject Hillary Clintons policy of fear and her policy of absolute nonsense, because its not working and its grossly incompetent, and we cant take it any longer, and were not going to take it any longer.
We are going to embrace the possibilities of change, but real change, not Obama change, real change.
Its time to believe in the future. Its time to believe in each other. Its time to believe in America again. This is how we are going to make America great again for all Americans, for all Americans.
Were going to make America great again for everyone, greater than ever before. And I promise you if I become president, we are going to be working again. We are going to have great jobs again. Youre going to be so happy. Youre going to be proud of your president. Youre going to be proud, proud, proud of our country once again.
Thank you very much, I appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, everyone. Today, I'd like to share my thoughts about the stakes in this upcoming and very important election.
People have asked me why I'm running for president. I built an amazing business that I love, and I get to work side-by-side with my children every single day. We come to work together, and turn visions into reality. We think big, and then we make it happen. We absolutely make it happen.
I love what I do, and I am grateful beyond words to the nation that has allowed me to do it. So, when people ask me why I am running, I very quickly answer -- I'm running to give back to this country which has been so very good to me.
When I see the crumbling roads and bridges, or the dilapidated airports or the factories moving overseas to Mexico or to other countries for that matter, I know these problems can all be fixed, but not by Hillary Clinton. Only by me.
The fact is, we can come back bigger, and better and stronger than ever before. Jobs, jobs, jobs.
Everywhere I look, I see the possibilities of what our country could be, but we can't solve any of these problems by relying on the politicians who created the problems themselves. We'll never be able to fix a rigged system by counting on the same people who have rigged it in the first place.
The insiders wrote the rules of the game to keep themselves in power and in the money. That's why we're asking Bernie Sanders voters to join our movement, so together, we can fix the system for all Americans -- so important.
This includes fixing all of our many disastrous trade deals -- and they are disastrous, they're destroying our country, because it's not just the political system that's rigged, it's the whole economy.
It's rigged by big donors who want to keep wages down. It's rigged by big businesses who want to leave our country, fire our workers and sell their products back into the United States with absolutely no consequences for them.
It's rigged by bureaucrats who are trapping kids in failing schools. It's rigged against you, the American people. Hillary Clinton, and as you know she -- most people know she's a world-class liar. Just look at her pathetic e-mail server statements or her phony landing...
... or her phony landing in Bosnia, where she said she was under attack, and the attack turned out to be young girls handing her flowers, a total and -- look, this was -- this was one of the beauts, a total and self-serving lie. Brian Williams' career was destroyed for saying less, remember that.
Yesterday, she even tried to attack me and my many businesses. But here -- and this is the way it is -- is the bottom line. I started off in Brooklyn, New York not so long ago with a small loan and built a business that today is worth well over $10 billion.
That's the kind of thinking we need in our leadership of our country. I've always had a talent for building businesses and importantly for creating jobs. That's a talent our country desperately needs. I'm running for president to end the unfairness and to put you, the American worker, first. It's about time.
We're going to put America first and we're going to make America great again. This election will decide whether we're ruled by the people or by the politicians.
Here is my promise to the American voter. If I'm elected president, I will end the special interest monopoly in Washington, D.C., very important.
The other candidate in this race has spent her entire life making money for special interests, and I will tell you, she's made plenty of money for them and she's been taking plenty of money out for herself. Hillary Clinton has perfected the politics of personal profit and even theft. She ran the State Department like her own personal hedge fund, doing favors for oppressive regimes, and many others and really many, many others in exchange for cash. Pure and simple, folks. Pure and simple.
Then when she left, she made $21.6 million giving speeches to Wall Street banks and other special interests and in less than two years, secret speeches that she does not want to reveal under any circumstances to the public. I wonder why?
Together, she and Bill made $153 million giving speeches to lobbyists, CEOs and foreign governments in the years since 2001. They totally own her and that will never ever change, including if she ever became president, God help us.
The choice in this election is a choice between taking our government back from the special interests or surrendering really the last scrap of independence to the total and complete control of people like the Clintons. Those are the stakes. Hillary Clinton wants to be president. But she doesn't have the temperament, or as Bernie Sanders said very strongly, the judgment to be president. She does not have the judgment. She believes...
She believes she's entitled to the office. Her campaign slogan is I'm with her. You know what my response is to that? I'm with you, the American people.
Thank you very much.
She thinks it's all about her. I know it's all about you. I know it's all about making America great again for all Americans, all Americans. Our country lost its way when it stopped putting the American people really first. We have to go back to putting our American people first. We got here because we switched from a policy of Americanism, focusing on what's good for America's middle class to a policy of globalism, focusing on how to make money for large corporations who can move their wealth and workers to foreign countries, all to the detriment of the American worker and the American economy itself.
We reward companies for offshoring, and we punish companies for doing business in America and keeping our workers employed. They get punished. This is not a rising tide that lifts all boats. This is a wave of globalism that wipes out our middle class and our jobs along with it. We need reform, and we have to reform our economic system, so that once again, we can all succeed together and America can become rich again.
We have to make America rich again.
And that's what I mean by America first. Our country will be better off when we start making our own products again, bringing our once great manufacturing capabilities back to the shores. I mean, we have to bring our manufacturers back to the United States, desperately needed -- desperately we need those jobs, and we need it even from our psyche.
One of the really great things, and one of the first major bills that George Washington signed -- was amazing when I saw this for the first time -- the encouragement and protection of manufacturing in America.
Our first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln, warned us by saying, "The abandonment of the protective policy by the American government will produce want and ruin among our people." In other words, we have to protect our country.
I have decided and visited cities and towns across America, all across America, and seen the devastation caused by the trade policies of Bill and Hillary Clinton, and it's total devastation, all over New York, all over Pennsylvania, all over New England, all over the country. Hillary Clinton supported Bill Clinton's disastrous and totally disastrous NAFTA. Just like she supported China's entrance into the World Trade Organization.
We've lost nearly one-third of our manufacturing jobs since these two Hillary-backed agreements were signed, among the worst we've ever done, among the most destructive agreements we've ever signed.
Our trade deficit with China soared 40 percent during Hillary Clinton's time as secretary of state -- a disgraceful performance, for which she should not be congratulated, but rather scorned.
Then she left China -- so true.
Then she left China, and what happened is billions and billions of dollars in our intellectual property -- and China has taken it, and it's a crime which is continuously going on and it's going on right now. They are stealing billions and billions of dollars of our intellectual property.
Hillary Clinton gave China millions of jobs, and our best jobs, and effectively let China completely rebuild itself. In return, Hillary Clinton got rich.
The book, "Clinton Cash" by Peter Schweizer, documents how Bill and Hillary used the State Department to enrich their family in America's and at America's expense. She gets rich making you poor.
Here is a quote from the book, "At the center of U.S. policy toward China was Hillary Clinton. At this critical time for U.S.- China relations, Bill Clinton gave a number of speeches that were underwritten by the Chinese government and its supporters. These funds were paid to the Clintons' bank account directly, while Hillary was negotiating with China on behalf of the United States."
Tell me, folks, does that work? She sold out our workers and our country for Beijing. Hillary Clinton has also been the biggest promoter of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which will ship millions more of our jobs overseas and give up congressional power to an international foreign commission.TRUMP: Now, because I have pointed out why it would be such a disastrous deal, she's pretending that she's against it. She's given and deleted, as you know, most people have heard about this, have we ever heard about her deleting anything? No, I don't think so.
She deleted the entire record from her book and deletion is something she really does know something about because she's deleted at least 30,000 e-mails, which by the way, should be able to be found.
Should be able to be found because the government -- I will say, I've always heard you can never really delete an e-mail. So it should be able to be found if they really want to find them, but I don't think they want to find them.
This is the latest Clinton cover-up and it doesn't change anything. If she is elected president, she will adopt the Trans- Pacific Partnership and we will lose millions of jobs and our economic independence for good. She'll do this, and just as she has betrayed the American worker on trade at every single stage of her career, and it will be even worse than the Clinton's NAFTA deal, and I never thought it could get worse than that.
We will lose jobs, we will lose employment, we will lose taxes, we will lose everything. We will lose our country. I want trade deals, but they have to be great for the United States and for our workers.
We don't make great deals anymore, but we will once I become president, I promise you.
It's not just our economy that's been corrupted, but our foreign policy too. The Hillary Clinton foreign policy has cost America thousands of lives and trillions and trillions of dollars and unleashed ISIS across the world. No secretary of state been more wrong, more often and in more places than Hillary Clinton.
Her decisions spread death, destruction and terrorism everywhere she touched. Among the victims of our late ambassador Chris Stevens. I mean, she -- what she did with him was absolutely horrible. He was left helpless to die as Hillary Clinton soundly slept in her bed. That's right. When the phone rang, as per the commercial, at three o'clock in the morning, Hillary Clinton was sleeping.
Ambassador Stevens and his staff in Libya made hundreds and hundreds of requests for security. They were desperate. They needed help. Hillary Clinton's State Department refused them all. She started the war that put them in Libya, denied him the security he asked for, then left him there to die. To cover her tracks, Hillary lied about the video being the cause of death, the famous video, all a lie, another Hillary lie.
Here's what one of the victims' mother had to say. I want the whole world to know it, she lied to my face and you know, this person cannot be president. She cannot be president.
In 2009, before Hillary Clinton was sworn in, it was a different world. Libya was cooperating, Iraq was seeing a reduction in violence, believe it or not. Syria was under control, Iran was being choked by sanctions. Egypt was governed by a friendly regime that honored its peace treaty with Israel. Something very nice because by the way, Israel has been totally mistreated by the United States. ISIS wasn't even on the map.
Fast forward to 2014. In just four years, Secretary Clinton managed to almost single-handedly destabilize the entire Middle East. Her invasion of Libya handed the country over to ISIS, the barbarians. Thanks to Hillary Clinton, Iran is now the dominant Islamic power in the Middle East and on the road to nuclear weapons.TRUMP: Hillary Clinton's support for a violent regime change in Syria has thrown the country into one of the bloodiest civil wars anyone has ever seen, while giving ISIS a launching pad for terrorism against the West. She helped force out a friendly regime in Egypt and replace it with the radical Muslim Brotherhood. The Egyptian military has retaken control, but Clinton has opened the Pandora's box of radical Islam.
Then there was the disastrous strategy of announcing our departure from Iraq, handing large parts of the country over to ISIS and the ISIS killers. ISIS threatens us today because of the decisions Hillary Clinton has made, along with President Obama.
ISIS also threatens peaceful Muslims across the Middle East, and peaceful Muslims across the world who have been terribly victimized by horrible brutality and who only want to raise their kids in peace and safety. In short...
... in short, Hillary Clinton's tryout for the presidency has produced one deadly foreign policy disaster after another. One by one, they're all bad. She's virtually done nothing right. She's virtually done nothing good.
It all started with her bad judgment in supporting the war in Iraq in the first place. Though I was not in government service, I was among the earliest to criticize the rush to war. And yes, even before the war ever started.
But Hillary Clinton learned nothing from Iraq. Because when she got into power, she couldn't wait to rush us off to war in Libya. She lacks the temperament and the judgment and the competence to lead our country. She should not be president under any circumstances.
In the words of a Secret Service agent posted outside the Oval Office, somebody that saw her a lot and knows her probably better than almost anybody, she simply lacks the integrity and temperament to serve in the office. From the bottom of my soul, I know this to be true. Her leadership style -- volcanic, impulsive, disdainful and disdainful of the rules, set for everyone else, hasn't changed one bit. Perhaps the most terrifying thing about Hillary Clinton's foreign policy is that she refuses to acknowledge the threat posed by radical Islam. In fact, Hillary Clinton supports a radical 550 percent increase in Syrian refugees coming into the United States, and that's an increase over President Obama's already high number.
Under her plan, we would admit hundreds of thousands of refugees from the most dangerous countries on earth, with no way to screen who they are, what they are, what they believe, where they come from. Already hundreds of recent immigrants and their children have been convicted of terrorist activity inside the United States. The father of the Orlando shooter was a Taliban supporter from Afghanistan, one of the most repressive anti-gay and anti-woman regimes on earth.
I only want to admit people who share our values and love our people.
Hillary Clinton wants to bring in people who believe women should be enslaved and gays put to death. Maybe her motivation lies among the more than 1,000 foreign donations Hillary failed to disclose while at the State Department. Hillary Clinton may be the most corrupt person ever to seek the presidency of the United States.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Here's some of really what we learned from the book in addition to what we've already discussed. A foreign telecom giant faced possible State Department sanctions for providing technology to Iran and other oppressive regimes.
So what did this company do? For first time ever, they decided to pay Bill Clinton $750,000 for a single speech. The Clintons got their cash, the telecom company escaped all sanctions.
Hillary Clinton's State Department approved the transfer of 20 percent of America's uranium holdings to Russia while nine investors in the deal funneled $145 million foundation $145 million to the Clinton Foundation. $145 million.
(Inaudible) appointed a top donor to a national security board with top secret access. Even though he had no national security credentials, although he did make a very large campaign contribution.
Hillary Clinton accepted $58,000 in jewelry from the government of Brunei when she was secretary of state plus millions more for her foundation.
The sultan of Brunei has push oppressive Sharia law, including the punishment by death and stoning if you happen to be gay.
The government of Brunei also stands to be one of the biggest beneficiary of Hillary's Trans-Pacific Partnership, which she would absolutely approve if given the chance.
Hillary Clinton's book, and just think of this, the book talks about it, but Hillary took $25 million from Saudi Arabia and much more from others, where being gay is also punishable by death.
Hillary took millions from Kuwait, Qatar, Oman and many other countries that horribly abuse women and the LGBT citizens.
To cover up her corrupt feelings, Hillary illegally stashed her State Department e-mails on a private server. She's under investigation, but it seems like nothing is going to happen. Even though other people who have done similar things, but much -- at a much lower level, their lives have been destroyed.
It's a rigged system, folks. It's a rigged system. Her server was easily hacked by foreign governments, perhaps even by her financial backers in communist China. Sure they have it. Putting all of America and our citizens in danger, great danger.
Then there are the 33,000 e-mails she deleted. Well, we may not know what's in those deleted e-mails, our enemies probably know every single one of them. So they probably now have a blackmail file over someone who wants to be the president of the United States.
This fact alone disqualifies her from the presidency. We can't hand over our government to someone who's deepest, darkest secrets may be in the hands of our enemies. Can't do it.
National security is also immigration security and Hillary wants neither. Hillary Clinton has put forward the most radical immigration platform in the history of the United States. She's pledged to grant mass amnesty and in a first 100 days, end virtually all immigration enforcement and thus create totally open borders for the United States, totally open borders.
By the way, 16,500 border patrol agents have endorsed Donald Trump, first time in the history that they've endorsed (inaudible).
The first victims of her radical policies will be poor African- American and Hispanic workers who need jobs. They are also the ones that she will hurt the most by far. Let me share with you a letter our campaign received from Mary Ann Mendoza. She lost her amazing son, Police Sergeant Brandon Mendoza, after he was killed by an illegal immigrant because of open borders and policies supported by Hillary Clinton.
Sadly, the Mendoza family is just one of thousands who have suffered the same fate. Here's an excerpt from Mrs. Mendoza's letter, "Hillary Clinton, who already has the blood of so many on her hands, is now announcing that she is willing to put each and every one of our lives in harm's way -- an open door policy to criminals and terrorists to enter our country.
Hillary is not concerned about you or I, she is only concerned about the power of the presidency and the power that it would bring. She needs to go to prison to pay for the crimes that she has already committed against our country." That's from Mrs. Mendoza. Hillary also wants to spend hundreds of billions of dollars to settle Middle Eastern refugees in the United States, on top of the current record level of immigration that we already have.
For the amount of money Hillary Clinton would like to spend on refugees, we could rebuild every inner city in America.
Hillary's Wall Street immigration agenda will keep immigrant communities poor and unemployed Americans totally out of work. She can't claim to care about African-American and Hispanic workers when she wants to bring in millions of new low-wage earners to compete against them and win against them, because the system is rigged against our people.
Here are a few things a Trump administration will do for the Americans and for the American people, but for our country. Number one, the first 100 days, I'll appoint judges who will uphold the Constitution of the United States.
Hillary Clinton's radical judges will virtually abolish the Second Amendment. Can't let that happen. I will change immigration rules to give unemployed Americans an opportunity to fill good, really good paying jobs. We don't have good jobs anymore. These will be good paying jobs.
We'll stand up to countries that cheat on trade, of which there are many. We'll cancel rules and regulations that send jobs overseas and everywhere else but our country.
We'll lift restrictions on energy production.
We will repeal and replace job-killing Obamacare. It is a total disaster.
We'll pass massive tax reform to create millions of new jobs and lower taxes for everyone.
And we are, by the way, the highest taxed nation in the world. Please remember that.
I'm going to impose tough new ethics rules to restore dignity to the office of the secretary of state.
There is one common theme in all of these reforms. It's going to be America first.
This is why stakes in November are so great. On election day, the politicians stand trial before the people. The voters are the jury. Their ballots are the verdict. We don't need or want another Clinton or Obama. We just can't take it anymore. So bad for our country and our people.
Come November, the American people will have a chance to issue a verdict on the politicians that have sacrificed their security, betrayed their prosperity and sold out their country and I mean totally sold out their country.
They will have a chance to vote for a new agenda with big dreams, bold ideas and enormous possibilities for the American people.
Hillary Clinton's message is old and tired. Her message is that things can't change. My message is that things have to change, and that this is our one chance and maybe our only chance to do that change and if we don't do it now, folks, I don't know that we'll ever ever have another chance. We have to have change, but real change, not Obama change.
Americans are the people that tamed the West, that dug out the Panama Canal, that sent satellites across the solar system, that built the great dams and so much more. Then we really started thinking small, something happened. Something happened to our mentality. We started thinking small. We stopped believing in what America could do and became reliant on our countries, other people and other institutions. We lost our sense of purpose and daring. But that's not who we are.
Come this November, we can bring America back, bigger and better and stronger than ever before.
We will build the greatest infrastructure on the planet Earth, the roads and railways and airports of tomorrow. Our military...
Our military, which is totally depleted, will have the best technology and the finest equipment. We will bring it back to the way that it must be; strong, strong, strong.
Massive new factories will come roaring into our country, breathing life and hope into our communities.
Inner cities, which have been horribly abused by Hillary Clinton and the Democrat Party, will finally, finally, finally be rebuilt.
Construction is what I know. I say nobody knows it better. The real wages for our workers have not been raised for 18 years. But these wages will start going up along with new jobs, jobs, jobs.
Hillary's massive taxation, regulation and open borders will destroy jobs and drive down wages for everyone, and that's what's been happening. And that's why you're seeing so many people coming to our rallies and so much unbelievable support.
We're also going to be supporting our police and law enforcement. We can never forget the great job they do.
Thank you.
I'm also going to appoint great Supreme Court justices, so important. One of the most important factors in this election. I'm going to have many appointments, could be as many as five, probably will be three. Could be four. One of the really big factors in this election. We are going to appoint Supreme Court Justices who will be outstanding. Outstanding. So important.
Our country is going to start working again. Jobs. People are going to start working again. Parents are going to start dreaming big for their children again, including parents in our inner cities.
I know.
Americans. Americans, the people that we love. Americans. America first. Make our country great again. Americans are going to start believing in the future of our country.
We are going to make America right again. We are going to make America safe again.
We are going to make America great again and great again for everyone. Everyone. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
This was going to be a speech on Hillary Clinton and all of the bad things and we all know whats going on, and especially how poor shed do as president in these very, very troubled times of radical Islamic terrorism.
Even her former Secret Service agent, whos seen her under pressure and in times of stress, has stated that she lacks the temperament and integrity to be our president. There will be plenty of opportunity to discuss these important issues at a later time, and I will deliver that speech very, very soon.
But today, theres only one thing to discuss, the growing threat of terrorism inside of our borders. The attack on the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida, was the worst terror strike on our soil since September 11th, and the worst mass shooting in our countrys history.
So many people  its just hard to believe, but just so many people dead, so many people gravely injured, so much carnage, such a disgrace. The horror is beyond description. The families of these wonderful people are totally devastated, and they will be forever. Likewise, our whole nation and indeed the whole world is devastated.
We express our deepest sympathies to the victims, the wounded, and their families. We mourn as one people for our nations loss, and pledge our support to any and all who need it. I would like to ask now that we all observe a moment of silence for the victims of this attack.
Thank you. Our nation stands together in solidarity with the members of Orlandos LGBT community. They have been through something that nobody could ever experience. This is a very dark moment in Americas history. A radical Islamic terrorist targeted the nightclub, not only because he wanted to kill Americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens, because of their sexual orientation.
Its a strike at the heart and soul of who we are as a nation. Its an assault on the ability of free people to live their lives, love who they want, and express their identity. Its an attack on the right of every single American to live in peace and safety in their own country.
We need to respond to this attack on America as one united people, with force, purpose, and determination. But the current politically correct response cripples our ability to talk and to think and act clearly. Were not acting clearly, were not talking clearly, weve got problems.
If we dont get tough, and if we dont get smart, and fast, were not going to have our country anymore. There will be nothing, absolutely nothing, left. The killer, whose name I will not use, or ever say, was born in Afghan, of Afghan parents, who immigrated to the United States.
His father published support for the Afghan Taliban, a regime which murders those who dont share its radical views, and they murdered plenty. The father even said he was running for president of Afghanistan. The bottom line is that the only reason the killer was in America in the first place, was because we allowed his family to come here.
That is a fact, and its a fact we need to talk about. We have a dysfunctional immigration system, which does not permit us to know who we let into our country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens properly. We have an incompetent administration.
And if Im elected president, that will not change, I will tell you, that will not change over the next four years. We have an administration that will not change. But if I get in there, its going to change, and its going to change quickly. Were going from totally incompetent to just the opposite, believe me.
Thank you.
With 50 people dead and perhaps more ultimately and dozens more wounded, we cannot afford to talk around issues anymore. We have to address these issues head-on. I called for a ban after San Bernardino and was met with great scorn and anger but now many years and I have to say many years but many are saying that I was right to do so. And although the pause is temporary we must find out what is going on. We have to do it.
It will be lifted  this ban  when and as a nation were in a position to properly and perfectly screen these people coming into our country. Theyre pouring in and we dont know what were doing. The immigration laws of the United States give the president powers to suspend entry into the country of any class of persons. Now, any class  it really is determined and to be determined by the president for the interests of the United States. And its as he or she deems appropriate. Hopefully its he in this case.
Thank you. I will use this power to protect the American people. When Im elected I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where theres a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies until we fully understand how to end these threats. After a full 
Thank you.
And by the way we have no choice. After a full and partial and long  really long overdue security assessment we will develop a responsible immigration policy that serves the interests and values of America.
We cannot continue to allow thousands upon thousands of people to pour into our country many of whom have the same thought process as this savage killer. Many of the principles of radical Islam are incompatible with Western values and institutions.
Remember this, radical Islam is anti-woman, anti-gay and anti- American.
I refuse to allow America to become a place where gay people, Christian people, Jewish people are targets of persecution and intimation by radical Islamic preachers of hate and violence.
This is not just a national security issue. Its a quality of life issue. If we want to protect the quality of life for all Americans  women and children, gay and straight, Jews and Christians and all people then we need to tell the truth about radical Islam and we need to do it now.
We need to tell the truth also about how radical Islam is coming to our shores. And its coming
With these people, folks, its coming. Were importing radical Islamic terrorism into the West through a failed immigration system and through an intelligence community held back by our president. Even our own FBI director has admitted that we cannot effectively check the backgrounds of people were letting into America. All of the September 11th hijackers were issued visas. Large numbers of Somali refugees in Minnesota have tried to join ISIS.
The Boston bombers came here through political asylum. The male shooter in San Bernardino again whose name I will not mention was the child of immigrants from Pakistan and he brought his wife, the other terrorist from Saudi Arabia through another one of our easily exploited visa programs.
Immigration from Afghanistan into the United States has increased nearly five fold  five fold in just one year. According to Pew Research, 99 percent of the people in Afghanistan support oppressive sharia law. We admit many more, and thats just the way it is. We admit many more from other countries in the region.
And Ill tell you what: They share these oppressive views and values. We want to remain a free and open society. Then, and if we do, then we have to control our borders. We have to control, and we have to control them now, not later. Right now.
Thank you.
Yet Hillary Clinton, for months, and despite so many attacks, repeatedly refused to even say the words radical Islam until I challenged her yesterday. And, guess what, she will probably say them. She sort of has said them, but lets see what happens. She really has no choice, but she doesnt want to.
However, shes really been forced, and she has been forced to say these words. She supports, and the reason is, she supports so much of what is wrong, and what is wrong with this country, and whats going wrong with our country and our borders. She has no clue, in my opinion, what radical Islam is and she wont speak honestly about it if she does, in fact, know. Shes in total denial, and her continuing reluctance to ever name the enemy broadcasts weakness across the entire world  true weakness.
I dont know if you know this, but just a few weeks before San Bernardino, the slaughter, thats all it was was a slaughter, Hillary Clinton explained her refusal to say the words radical Islam. Here is what she said, exact quote, Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism. That is Hillary Clinton.
So, she says the solution is to ban guns. They tried that in France which has among the toughest gun laws anywhere in the world, and 130 people were brutally murdered by Islamic terrorists in cold blood. Her plan is to disarm law abiding Americans, abolishing the Second Amendment, and leaving only the bad guys and terrorists with guns. No good. Not going to happen, folks. Not going to happen. Not going to happen. 
Thank you.
She wants to take away Americans guns and then admit the very people who want to slaughter us. Let them come into the country, we dont have guns. Let them come in, let them have all the fun they want.
I will be meeting with the NRA, which has given me their earliest endorsement in a presidential race, to discuss how to ensure Americans have the means to protect themselves in this age of terror. I will be always defending the Second Amendment.
Thank you. Thank you.
The bottom line is that Hillary supports policies that bring the threat of radical Islam into American and allow it to grow oversees, and it is growing. In fact, Hillary Clintons catastrophic immigration plan will bring vastly more radical Islamic immigration into this country, threatening not only our society but our entire way of life. When it comes to radical Islamic terrorism, ignorance is not bliss. Its deadly  totally deadly.
The Obama administration, with the support of Hillary Clinton and others, has also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence gathering and we have, just, no intelligence gathering information. We need this information so badly, and he stopped it. We dont have the support. We dont have the support of the law enforcement system because Obama is not letting them do their job. They are not being allowed to do their job. And, they can do it well  better than anybody.
We need a new leader. We need a new leader fast.
Thank you.
They have put political correctness above common sense, above your safety, and above all else. I refuse to be politically correct.
I want to do the right thing. I want to straighten things out and I want to make America great again.
The days of deadly ignorance will end, and they will end soon if Im elected. As president I will give our intelligence community, law enforcement and military the tools they need to prevent terrorist attacks. They dont have those tools now.
We need an intelligence gathering system second to none. Second to none. That includes better cooperation between state, local and federal officials, and with our allies, very importantly. I will have an Attorney General, a Director of National Intelligence and a Secretary of Defense wholl know how to fight a war on radical Islamic terrorism.
And they will have the support that they need to get the job done right, not like it is right now. Its not right.
We also must ensure the American people are provided the information they need to understand the threat. The Senate subcommittee on Immigration has already identified hundreds of immigrants charged with terrorist activities inside the United States since September 11th. Nearly a year ago, the Senate Subcommittee asked President Obamas Department of Justice, State and Homeland Security to provide the immigration history of all terrorists inside the United States. These Departments refused to comply. Nobody even knows why. They refused to comply.
President Obama must release the full and complete immigration histories of all individuals implicated in terrorist activities of any kind since September 11th. So important. The public has a right to know how these people got here, how they came on to this great land, why are they here?
We have to screen applicants to know whether they are affiliated with or supporting radical groups and beliefs, very simple. We have to control the amount of future immigration into this country and we have to prevent large pockets of radicalization from forming inside America. Not complicated.
Every  and just think of this. Take a look. Every single event, even a single individual can be devastating, and all you have to do is take a look at what happened in Orlando and what happened in other cases. Just a single event. And just one person. Can you imagine what theyll do in large groups, which were allowing now to come here.
Truly our President doesnt know what hes doing. Hes failed us and hes failed us badly. Under his leadership this situation will not get any better, it will only get worse. And Ive been saying that for a long time. Each year the United States permanently admits 100,000 immigrants from the Middle East and many more from Muslim countries outside of the Middle East. Our government has been admitting ever- growing numbers, year after year, without any effective plan for our own security.
In fact, Clintons State Department was in charge of admissions and the admissions process for people applying to enter from overseas. Having learned nothing from these attacks, she now plans to massively increase admissions without a screening plan including a 500 percent increase in Syrian refugees coming into our country. Tell me, tell me  how stupid is that?
This could be a better, bigger, more horrible version than the legendary Trojan Horse ever was. Altogether, under the Clinton plan, youd be admitting hundreds of thousands of refugees from the Middle East with no system to vet them, or to prevent the radicalization of the children and their children. Not only their children, by the way, theyre trying to take over our children and convince them how wonderful ISIS is and how wonderful Islam is and we dont know whats happening.
The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why she believes immigration from these dangerous countries should be increased without any effective system to really to screen. Were not screening people.
So why dont we have an effective screening system? We dont. Were being laughed at all over the world. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why we should admit anyone into our country who supports violence of any kind against gay and lesbian Americans. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us how she will pay for it, her plan will cost hundreds of billions of dollars long term.
Wouldnt this be money better spent rebuilding America for our current population including the many poor people already living here. We have cities, we have inner cities
We have poverty all over and this is how were spending billions of dollars. We have to stop the tremendous flow of Syrian refugees into the United States. We dont know who they are, they have no documentation and we dont know what theyre planning and we wont unless we have proper supervisor and proper leadership in which case theyre out of here. What I want
What I want is common sense. I want a mainstream immigration policy that promotes American values. Thats a choice I put before the American people. A mainstream immigration policy designed to benefit America or Hillary Clintons radical immigration policy designed to benefit politically correct special interests. Thats all it is. Weve got to get smart and tough and vigilant and weve got to do it now because later is too late  going to be too late for our country.
The media talks about home grown terrorism but Islamic radicalism and thats a very, very important term  a term that the president refuses to use and the networks that nurture it are imports from overseas whether you like it or whether you dont like it. Yes, there are many radicalized people already inside our country as a result of poor policies of the past.
But the whole point is that we will be much, much and it will be easier to deal with our current problem if we dont keep on bringing people who add to the problem. And thats what theyre doing. Were letting all of these people  hundreds of thousands of people come in and all theyre doing is adding to this incredible problem we have.
For instance, the controversial mosque attended by the Boston bombers had at its founder and as its founder an immigrant from overseas charged in an assassination plot. This shooter and amazingly in Orlando was the child of an immigrant father who supported one of the most repressive regimes on earth. Why would we admit people who support violent hatred?
Hillary Clinton can never claim to be a friend of the gay community as long as she continues to support immigration policies that bring Islamic extremists to our country and who suppress women, gays and anyone who doesnt share their views or values.
She cant have it both ways. She cant claim to be supportive of these communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to oppress these same communities. How does this kind of immigration make our lives better? How does this kind of immigration make our country better? Why does Hillary Clinton want to bring people in in vast numbers who reject our values? Why? Explain.
Ask yourself who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community, Donald Trump with actions or Hillary Clinton with her words?
I will tell you who the better friend is and some day I believe that will be proven out bigly.
And by the way the LGBT community is just  whats happened to them is just so sad and to be thinking about where their policies are currently with this administration is a disgrace to that community, I will tell you right now.
Clinton wants to allow radical Islamic terrorists to pour into our country. They enslave women, and they murder gays. I dont want them in our country.
Immigration is a privilege, and we should not let anyone into this country who doesnt support our communities. All of our communities, every single one of them. Americans already admitted four times more immigrants than any country on Earth, anybody in the world. Four times more. At least, because we dont even know whos coming in. And we continue to admit millions more with no real checks or scrutiny.
Not surprisingly, wages for our workers havent budged. In almost 20 years. You wonder why we get the crowds, you wonder why we get this tremendous support, you wonder why Ive gotten more votes than any Republican in any primary in the history of the Republican Party? Take a look at that. Take a look at your security, take a look at the wages. For 18 years theyve been stagnant, theyve even gone down.
So whether its a matter of national security, or financial security, we cant afford to keep on going like this. Cannot afford it. We owe $19 trillion in debt. And no longer have any options. Our communities from all backgrounds are ready for some relief. This is not an act of offense against anyone. Its really an act of defense. I want us all, all of us, to work together. We have to form a partnership, with our Muslim communities. We have Muslim communities in this country that are great, and we have to form that partnership.
Now, the Muslim community, so important. They have to work with us. They have to cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad. They know it. And they have to do it, and they have to do it forthwith. I want to fix our schools. I want to fix our bridges. And our jobs market, were going to have it rocket again, were going to make great trade deals. But I want every American to succeed including Muslims.
But the Muslims have to work with us. They have to work with us. They know whats going on. They know that he was bad. They knew the people in San Bernardino were bad. But you know what? They didnt turn them in. And you know what? We had death, and destruction.
Hillary Clinton wants to empty out the Treasury to bring people into the country that include individuals who preach hate against our citizens. I want to protect our citizens, all of our citizens. The terrorist attack on Pulse nightclub demands a full and complete investigation into every single aspect of the assault. In San Bernardino, as an example, people who knew what was going on, they knew exactly, but they used the excuse of racial profiling for not reporting it. They said oh, We thought so but we didnt want to use racial profiling. Which was probably an excuse given to them by their lawyer, so they dont get in trouble.
We need to know what the killer discussed with his relatives, parents, friends and associates. We need to know if he was affiliated with any radical mosques or radical activists and what, if any, is their immigration status. We have to know, and we have to know fast. We need to know if he traveled anywhere and who he traveled with. We need to know, and we need to make sure, every single last person involved in this plan, including anyone who knew something but didnt tell us, is brought to justice, so when people know whats going on and they dont tell us, and we have an attack, and people die, these people have to have consequences. Big consequences.
America must do more  much more  to protect its citizens, especially people who are potential victims of crimes based on their backgrounds or sexual orientation, as you just saw in Orlando.
 It also means we must change our foreign policy. The decision to overthrow the regime in Libya, then pushing for the overthrow of the regime in Syria, among other things, without plans for the day after, have created space for ISIS to expand and grow like nobody has ever seen before.
These actions, along with our disastrous Iran deal, have also reduced our ability to work in partnership with our Muslim allies in the region. That is why our new goal must be to defeat Islamic terrorism not nation building. No more nation building. Its never going to work.
And by the way weve spent almost $5 trillion over the years on trying to nation build in the Middle East and it has been complete and total disaster. Were further away now than we were 15 years ago. For instance, the last major NATO mission was Hillary Clintons war in Libya. That mission helped to unleash ISIS on a new continent.
Ive said NATO need to change its focus and stop terrorism. We have to focus on terrorism and we have to stop terrorism. Since Ive raised that criticism and its OK. Ive gotten no credit for it but these are minor details  NATO has since announced a new initiative  front page of the Wall Street Journal four days ago focused on just that. America must unite the whole civilized world in the fight against Islamic terrorism.
Pretty much like we did with communism during the Cold War. We tried it President Obamas way, doesnt work. He gave the world his apology tour. We got ISIS and many other problems in return. Thats what we got. Remember the famous apology tour. Were sorry for everything.
Id like to conclude my remarks today by again expressing our solitarily with the people of Orlando who have come under this horrific attack. When Im president I pledge to protect and defend all Americans who live inside our borders. Wherever they come from, wherever they were born, I dont care. All Americans living here and following our laws not other laws will be protected.
Thank you. Thank you. Were going to be tough and were going to be smart and were going to do it right. America will be a tolerant and open society. America will also be a safe society. We will protect our borders at home. We will defeat ISIS overseas. We have no choice. We will ensure every parent can raise their children in peace and safety. We will make America rich again. We will make America safe again. We will make America great again. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you very much, everybody. Appreciate it. Thank you.